Prelude: The Glorious Decades
(1972-1988)

May 14, 1988 - the absolute apex of human civilization. 43 years of continuous, unabated economic prosperity since the end of World War II in 1945. The world enjoys a splendor of opulence and luxury from the opening of free trade with the Shanghai Accords in 1972. The (in)famous Doomsday Clock shows that the world is at an outstanding 45 minutes to midnight as of 1987 - the farthest away it ever will be in human history. Thousands of Boeing 2707 and Lockheed L-2000 supersonic airliners connect the globe at over twice the speed of sound. The Station of International Cooperation and Friendship (SICF) - is approaching its first-year anniversary of operation - while the first joint Soviet-American mission to Outpost One is set to launch in two weeks time. All across the Western world in particular - the average person thrives in mega-houses, has a color TV in every bedroom, and makes routine vacations to far away, exotic locations. Yet observers from a place sideways in time would note that the glitz and glamor of the 1970s and 1980s appears… uncanny. Families breed like rabbits with reckless abandon - swelling the global population to unsustainable levels. Society and culture spin on an axis of shallow hyper-consumerism, cynicism and youth apathy. And worst of all - the cost of technological and societal progress is wreaking havoc and devastation on Earth’s ecology and environments. How did this world come about? How did the mania of unchecked progress spiral out of control?

A Transformative New Order (1945-1960)

Contrary to what most historians argue - the roots of the Glorious Decades go back NOT to the signing of the Shanghai and Tehran Accords in 1972 - NOR to the fateful assassination of Mao Zedong on September 11, 1971 - NOR to the triumph of Richard Nixon in the 1968 United States presidential election - NOR even the foundation of the Gaia Liberation Organization of Goddess’ Lament (GLOGL) in 1964.

Nay, the roots of the Glorious Decades date all the way back to the closing days of World War II (1939-45). As the days of the Third Reich and the Showa State were numbered by 1944-45, the groundwork for the post-war economic and geopolitical order for the next 4 decades were being laid out by the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, China and France.

World War II had caused immense economic and cultural destruction of Europe and Asia. Destruction that practically left almost every major Great Power in 1914 - the United Kingdom, France, the Soviet Union, Germany, Italy and Japan - utterly shattered. Destruction that the United States of America was nigh completely spared from.

The Screamin’ Sixties (1960-69)

The Glamorous Seventies (1970-79)

The Glam-White Eighties (1980-88)

Glorious Decades Fashion

Glorious Decades Pop Culture

Glorious Decades Technology

The Cost of Progress


Part 1
The American Twilight and the Second Civil War (2000-2023)

Excerpt from “The Dying Eagle: America in the Rotting Twenties”, by Anathi Yoyo, University of Isixeko Sokufunda Press, 970 ASJ 


New York, 2023. Wildfires and pollution have constantly drenched the cityscape in smog since the Red Decades.

https://youtu.be/x-o3CJytIPE?si=CWJqklywhO4tFfNO 

It's the year 2023... nothing works. Not the Government, not the Factories, and not the Irrigation systems. People are still the same. They'll do anything to get what they need. And they need just one more good day, one more reason to live. 

The crime rate was only increasing. Mob bosses, radical ecoterrorists, and even corporate espionage dominated the country’s over- and underworld and overwhelmed the scattered, underfed boys in faded blue, to say nothing of the ever present murder and rape cases. On a good day, the murder rate in New York City was estimated at only 243 per 24 hours, and that was before the FBI stopped even recording crimes. The Library of Crime Statistics had ‘Seen God’ in December 2022, and the Bureau has largely given up finding a Reader nihilistic enough to have the willpower to record it. 

The Black Winter of 2022 was hard all across the nation. The Universal Food Ration was pushed to the limit, even with the advent of Ration Omega to supplement the dwindling numbers. Researchers in the remains of famine and drought-stricken northern California noted that those with an extensive diet of Ration Omega tended to get sick easier and suffered from symptoms of malnourishment, though the corporation quickly suppressed these studies. The cramped conditions of many cities, the accelerating thawing and melting of ice and permafrost, and the severe crippling of the health service had caused a massive resurgence of previously eradicated diseases. This had culminated in a flood of viruses like the Chicago Fever, the Blue Flu and the Charleston Cough. The crown of these was known simply as “The Blight”, a mysterious disease that spread extremely rapidly throughout the world and US - or so the White House had said. The Department of Sanitation recommended that anyone suffering from even mild symptoms should Seek God. A list later published and distributed via word-of-mouth and chalk slate described the symptoms: mental fatigue, deteriorated cognition, reduced muscle mass, being unable to retain body heat, and a rejection of most foodstuffs. 

In February 2023, things had gotten so bad that President Sanderson got on radio and addressed the Blight as the greatest threat the United States has faced - a message that every president had given every year since 1989. He urged Americans showing symptoms to self-isolate, then Seek God. He compared it to a father sacrificing his life so that his kid could live, and even promised increases in death benefits. His final, tearful remark was a suggestion that Seeking God was the preferable alternative to “things to come”. 

The Republican Party seized this as a talking point, feigning outrage that the President had literally told the nation to “off themselves” and should be impeached immediately. The 11 Republican representatives in Congress signed articles of impeachment towards the President, however the Democratic supermajority ignored the notion. “The President, as a citizen of the United States, was merely exercising his First Amendment rights,” the Chairman of the DNC and Press Secretary, Harry Holden, said. 

As the Blight Scandal spiraled out of control, the Democratic Party announced sweeping agricultural legislation, called the “American Bounty Act”, which removed any environmental protections left and officially dismantled the National and State park system. The already scarce free land was replaced with even more new “superfarms”, the biggest expansion of the system since its creation. Overseen by the Food, Inc and endorsed by the Green Party, the Act promised to create millions of jobs and help reduce the strain and disease of the inner city. 

The few Republicans in Congress called the Act a “handout to Big Food” and simultaneously a human rights violation, scathingly criticizing it. However, the ten or so representatives in Congress could do nothing as the act quickly passed with a supermajority of Democrats and Greens.

Of course, the researchers and elites knew that there was no arable land remaining in the natural parks.

On the superfarms themselves, other problems arose. The massive, labor intensive industry had long been reliant on the bloated prison system of the United States, and indeed the latter had been refitted to serve the former. Crimes that 30 years ago had resulted in fines often now carried decades long sentences in various private labor programs. Conditions were in many cases deliberately kept poor enough that resistance, which now easily allowed for sentences to receive decades long extensions, was common. 

The United States had long been an agricultural giant, however, much of the best arable land was being cultivated for over a century prior to the climate crisis. As the demand for basic foodstuffs (by now only a handful of calorie dense grains) skyrocketed, sustainable crop rotation fell by the wayside, the soil being exhausted by unrelenting use. Various fertilizers could compensate, but by the 2020s nearly 40% of agricultural land was essentially unusable, even with night farming. 

Although the superfarms continued to carve into the last vestiges of undeveloped land to compensate, many of these areas had never been farmed for a reason. Some were arid deserts, useless as much of the Southwest was regularly experiencing temperatures in the 120F range for much of the summer. Other locations had no soil at all, or were so polluted that agriculture was obviously futile. Despite the number of superfarms continuing to climb, the total agricultural production of America had actually peaked in 2011. Much of what did grow was disease ridden (though largely free of pesticides as most insect populations had collapsed) toxic, and underground. Most of this was simply mashed and dried into a kind of paste, used to fortify Food, Inc products. 

The workers of these superfarms, mistreated and underfed, had a yearly mortality rate of nearly 7%. Those guarding them often lived in little better accommodations, and had little oversight to ensure they acted humanely. By 2022, the prisoners had unwittingly become part of Food, Inc's latest product, to whom the only warning sign was an inexplicable untick in the number of prisoners shot for ‘infractions’. The large scale use of prisoners was twofold, to reduce an increasingly unproductive and undesired group of people, and to ensure that the true origin of Ration Omega, if it ever came to light, might be more digestible if the people thought only the dead and the imprisoned were being used.

But the fact is, people don’t make a good choice of livestock. The average American’s body in 2022 contained 115,000 calories, enough to feed someone on minimum rationing for less than 3 months. Even with the prisoners adding to those who chose to Seek God, only a tiny fraction of the United States' caloric needs could be fulfilled through these measures. This was known to those who had facilitated the scheme, but the goal had never been to somehow feed the living with the dead for eternity. The hope was that Ration Omega would allow for disease, poverty, and crashing birth rate, to gradually wind the population down to a sustainable level, whatever that was now.

And in many areas, food wasn’t even a major issue.

Beyond the Plains, large parts of the nation were essentially depopulated. The south-west had long been struggling with intense heatwaves since the Hot Summer of 1990, and temperatures had rapidly grown to being unliveable, with heat and humidity proving a deadly killer. Phoenix was one such of them, with the city suffering from increasingly lethal summers, the situation not being helped by the abandonment of the suburbs to the overcrowded cities and heat absorbent properties of the road asphalt. People became packed in the city centre, and with housing being in increasingly short supply, were dying out in the streets in the summers, the endlessly growing cases of heatstroke overwhelming the city’s emergency services. More and more people, rich and poor, young and old, fled north and east for cooler temperatures and the prospect of not being threatened with death every year.

But the real killer was drought.

The Colorado River was rapidly drying up, and the consequences became obvious suddenly in the Hot Summer, where water reached dangerously low levels and emergency water rationing was declared across the cities in the deserts of the southwest. These measures quickly became permanent as temperatures continued to drastically increase and mitigation efforts became too costly for the debt-drowning state and federal governments to afford. The water rationing and heat quickly led to riots, as order in Phoenix quickly left and the cartels encroached. Riots led to massacres, as the police department desperately fought to maintain order in the crumbling city - one slip up or accident could lead to a hundred dead, the incident covered up by the government. In 2003, the government declared Phoenix to be an “unsustainable city” around the same times as Albuquerque, Los Angeles, and many others hit hard by the changing climate. This simply meant that government services and funding would be withdrawn imminently from the city, and the populace was “urgently advised” to evacuate (the government didn’t have the money for a large-scale program). The mass evacuations and depopulation accelerated, and the formal economy shut down to be replaced by cartels and drug lords ruling over the city’s ruins. By the 2010s, Phoenix was a ghost city, with only vagrants and homeless living there, employed by the cartels, fighting amongst the last few reserves of food and water.

Phoenix by 2020 is desolate - utterly abandoned, with rows upon rows of vacant, baking houses and towering apartments leering through the sky. It is an open-air oven, boiling alive those few who inhabit it, and unfortunately sharing the fate of many other cities not only in Arizona, but in neighbouring states and countries.

Los Angeles is another victim of this deadly combo. The “City of Angels” had been on a constant decline since the Red Decades, with the shutting down of Hollywood and the 1996 water riots crippling the city’s reputation and economy, the near-permanent state of martial law not helping. It was declared “unsustainable” slightly later than Phoenix, in 2006, as rioting and anarchy continued to grow and render the LAPD useless. As the rivers quickly dried up and the city became drenched in smoke from wildfires and pollution, people quickly left and it suffered the same fate as the rest of the west - abandoned by government, abandoned by God. The remaining inhabitants hide out away from the sun in decaying buildings and fight amongst themselves for the remaining resources. The Angels have left for the last time and will not return perhaps ever again.

(new image)
A photo of a desolate street in Los Angeles, circa 2002. The intense heat makes it impossible to go out.

Further east, Denver is not completely unliveable, but is rapidly reaching that point.

The city became packed with rural migrants following the Dust Bowl of 1995, which wrought havoc on rural farming communities and local agriculture, causing food prices to spike yet again. It’s population very rapidly increased and the government quickly crammed in new apartments and housing into the already cramped city centre. And with many more people comes a lot more heat - the worsening heatwaves of the 90s threatened to cripple the city, and water shortages brought it to the brink of total collapse in the ways Phoenix and Los Angeles were following.

Yet the government took a special interest in Denver compared to the other cities. As the food crisis intensified, massive superfarms were built on giant scales in the 2000s and 2010s to take advantage of whatever land there was left. Denver’s bloated population was considered too costly to evacuate and risked a giant humanitarian crisis that could spiral into rebellion, so the government did the next best thing they could think of - send them to the farms. Colorado’s infamous superfarms were powered with near-unlimited migrant labour from Denver, and many “internal refugees” from abandoned desert cities often stopped and were sent to work in Denver’s superfarms. The proximity to the farms caused Denver’s food prices to be decently lower than lots of the nation’s and they were able to get organic (if not weak and diseased) food for longer than most Americans. The rapid expansion also led to some suburbanisation - houses in the suburbs were demolished and replaced with cramped and packed apartment blocks to house Denver’s growing refugee population.

By the 2010s the heatwaves and further drought issues pushed the city more and more towards the breaking point. Washington couldn’t allow Denver to fall, lest it fall into a severe supply crisis. To avert this it helped divert more and more water from surrounding rivers to the city. Despite this, the situation continued to get worse and worse. Denver was a ticking time bomb, and everyone knew this. It would take one extra-strong heatwave, one sharp decrease in water supply for the bomb to explode.

And in summer 2022, it finally blew. A combination of Denver’s water supply dropping to near-zero and an intense dust bowl in the superfarms led to riots breaking out among the city’s now-unemployed. The riots rapidly grew violent and the police force was unable to contain them. The situation became untenable, and the government made the controversial decision to declare Denver “unsustainable” and conduct evacuations to neighbouring cities. The crisis was considered one of the major contributors to 2022’s “Black Winter” and agriculture never recovered following.

(new picture)
Denver in 1997. The influx of internal refugees from rural Colorado and the southwest led to many homeless shelters like this.

Up north, the Great Lakes were doing comparatively better.


Chicago, 2010. The proximity to Lake Illinois kept nature thriving until the heatwave of 2015. 

The rapid rise in universal free trade following 1972’s Shanghai Accords prompted massive deindustrialisation across America. Giant corporations, ever looking for ways to increase profit, shut down their factories in the midwest and opened new sweatshops throughout Asia, Africa and South America. American manufacturing was already in decline, but the advent of free trade accelerated the process dramatically, and the Rust Belt saw heavy deterioration as workers fled to the cities of the south and east. Wars in the Glorious Decades were not fought with bayonets and bullets but tariffs and trade negotiations. The New York Stock Exchange became the staging ground for many conflicts, with industrialists and financiers flocking to the ever-expanding towers of Manhattan as stocks skyrocketed ever higher. These trends looked unstoppable until the Middle East became covered with radioactive decay and free trade collapsed overnight. The crash and Graves’s protectionism led to a resurgence of manufacturing and the revival of the rusting factories of Detroit, Minneapolis and Chicago, spurred on by the American Industry Protection Act of 1994. 

The megalithic factories of the Midwest were refitted from producing automotives and luxury goods to producing essential supplies in post-1988 America. As many railroads and highways led to Chicago, it was chosen by the Graves administration to be the center of manufacturing in this new America. Sanitary products, face masks, and coarse uncomfortable clothing were all manufactured in Chicago, to be shipped out across the crumbling country. In the northernmost plains, the warming climate and huge repository of freshwater actually helped agriculture in a small production boom until the heatwave of 2015. Rows upon rows of corn were grown and carted by hand to the Twin Cities, located at the head of the murky Mississippi, then to be shipped down the river using tugboats. Detroit became the spearhead to rebuilding American industry: essential metalworks such as the manufacturing of pipes, tools, wrenches and other parts of machinery were used to refit the rest of the nation. There were even reports of secret bullet factories for the increasingly militant police forces of the nation. These decaying cities, once seemingly condemned to disrepair, were revived overnight as people fled to the cooler and more hospitable climates and more employable cities of the Midwest. They were not as flashy as the once neon-drenched New York City, Boston, Los Angeles, or Seattle, but they offered a commodity in increasingly short supply - hope. 

The pace was never fast enough though. Shirts were made so carelessly that most only lasted a year at most. Corn rotted in the humidity of the South before it could reach the starving workers of the Southern Superfarms. For every missing part that was manufactured, two more parts would be broken down. Even the Riot Gear made for the LAPD wouldn’t last, as intense civil unrest and budget cuts caused police to exhaust all forms of protection when the crowd went wild. 

Chicago was one such city affected by the rise and falls of “Made in America”. People flocked to Chicago following the record heat waves of 1990, 1991 and 1992, resulting in the city’s population more than doubling during the 1990s. The city was completely unprepared for this - as more and more moved in, overcrowding became a significant issue. Housing was in short supply, and giant apartment blocks were constructed over bulldozed houses, with each room containing the bare minimum of concubines and appliances and designed to contain as many people as possible (one room could hold three nuclear families). And even then, millions of people were forced to the streets and taken into the rapidly growing and strengthening criminal underworld, built up in the new alleyways and tunnels the police would never touch. And even though it was cooler than the south or southwest, Chicago, partly due to the abundance of people, still got very, very hot. Riots broke out regularly in the 1990s and only got worse in the 2000s. The government was forced to heavily militarise the Chicago Police Department and brutally suppress protests - in the riots following the 2004 Midwest Heatwave, the police opened fire on a group of protestors, leading to hundreds dead and continuing riots that stretched on until the heatwave calmed down in the winter.

Why did people flock to a city with such a formerly bad reputation? It was twofold - one was the cooler weather and proximity to the Great Lakes, where freshwater was more readily available, and the other was the rebirth of manufacturing. Millions of new job opportunities were created, and Chicago and Detroit and others were seen as places where one could easily get employed - that was partly true, as jobs were more readily available in the rust belt than other areas of the country (aside from the plains), and there was no real requirement for being hired. However, only so many factories could be rebuilt in a certain period of time, and so for the people coming there later, finding a job was a struggle, and the economy just continued to worsen. Many people came there and stayed unemployed, and the criminal underground only grew.

The unions, who were reinvigorated by the American Unions and Workers Act of 1989, were able to help keep wages and working conditions as amicable as they possibly could. However, as corporations gained more power and increasingly gained more power over the Democratic Party, their attitude towards unions gradually shifted. In 2000, the newly elected corporate Democrat governor of Illinois introduced the Industrial Preservation Act, which increased the requirement to form a union to 50% and limited strikes to a maximum of two days. This prompted outcry from the workers and unions, who launched a general strike to stop the Act from passing. An agreement was eventually made to remove the strike and other disagreeable provisions, but the damage was already done. More and more Democratic state governments implemented restrictions on unions, and in 2005 a general strike would be launched over the Labor and Work Reform Act, which as part of the earlier “crime reforms” introduced would abolish the prison system and mandate the use of penal labor as punishment for crimes. The strike went for a week before it was brutally suppressed by the National Guard, factories being burned down as punishment. Following this, the American Unions and Workers Act of 2005 was introduced to replace the old 1989 one, and passed with a supermajority of most Democrats and Republicans in Congress. All trade unions would be merged into one singular union - the American Labor Front, with President Sweeney disregarding the parallels to the Nazi equivalent. The union would be controlled and subsidised by the government, and the remaining ones knew exactly what that meant - extinction. 

Strikes rolled on in 2005 but underwent brutal suppression. Most unions folded - the leaders of the ones that didn’t were executed. The last remaining one holed themselves in a Chicago factory, determined to stay there and fight back until they were killed. The government then went and burned the factory down along with everyone in it, burning the remains again and again to make an example of them. Anyone opposing the “rebuilding” would be treated as a terrorist, a communist, an insurgent.

As internal migration controls were introduced, Chicago saw little change in the late 2000s aside from the ever-deadlier heatwaves. Manufacturing led to more and more pollution in the city. Available freshwater was continually polluted and disease was rife. The Great Heatwave of 2015 caused smoke to blanket the city, and water shortages led to a few days of intense and brutally suppressed rioting. Chicago in 2020 is a decaying, overcrowded ruin with the highest crime rate in the country above Denver, choking on pollution and built on the numerous corpses of the unionists and rioters that struggled and failed to resist the grasping hands of corporatism.


A picture of the factory the last free trade unionists were killed in, taken in 2005.


Excerpt from “The Eagle and the Snake: A History of the Second American Civil War”, by Gabriel Treviño León, Patagonia Press, New Buenos Aires, 934 ASJ


National Guardsmen in Chicago line up “Communists” for execution, 2002

The United States was determined to keep an image of stability around it. By the 2010s, most cities were essentially under martial law, with armed police patrolling the streets and the prison labor acted as a deterrent for any crime. Most departments of government were still active, if not working as a skeleton crew. However, on the inside it was crumbling. Internal opposition was rapidly building up as dissatisfaction among people grew against the ineffectual Democratic government, and with elections being bought out and delivering the same result each time, people were forced to move onto other methods.

Following the bloodbaths of 2004 and 2005, a vast majority of the nation, including many of the Democrats in the House of Representatives, were confused by the severe backlash. How did the party of the Common Man start to treat their workers this way? The Sweeney Administration, already attempting to stem the crime waves of the 1990s, claimed that subversives were trying to disrupt the hard-working men of America, that red-blooded American men would never ask for easier hours and better pay as they should be grateful they have a job in this glorious nation. 

“These strikes and demolitions are the work of Communists who are trying to destroy each American’s right to a roof over his head, a shirt on his back, and a decent meal after a hard day’s work,” President Sweeney said during a televised conference on September 23rd, 2005. “And I say to you, America: if you, as an employee, know a worker who is disrupting the rebuilding of our great nation, of anyone who is disrupting the esteemed business of the Lake Illinois Clothing Company, or of the reputable enterprise of 4M, or any other proudly American business, let your nearest police officer know, and they will be met with consequences most severe.” 

The newer generation, of those who had grown up knowing only bountiful products from China and the USSR, did not see the contradiction in the President’s speech. Few of the older generation made the connection and spoke out, risking their National Relief payments. Fewer still made the connection that 4M, Lake Illinois Clothing Company and other corporate goliaths like the Food, Inc were President Smith’s biggest donors.

https://youtu.be/FFJ6Vv7Sn6o?si=gGlQ_dnnV74CsegP 

The overwhelming repression did not stop extremists, however. The American Volunteer Army, a ragtag group of misguided anarchists, frequently protested at their own peril. Protests led to riots, riots led to bombings, and bombings led to guerilla warfare. These acts of terrorism were ironically used by the federal government to justify harsher and harsher conditions for the dwindling class of employed citizens. After the 2011 bombing of a Food, Inc Factory outside Madison, Wisconsin, the decision was made to use only unpaid prison labor for the manufacturing of all goods. The motives for the bombing were never publicly announced. Soon, the cities of the Midwest were just as oppressive and cramped as Denver or a Southern super farm.

In 2010, the city of Portland seceded from the United States, and declared itself the United Communes of Portland. Other counties in Oregon and Washington followed suit, and formed the new nation of Cascadia, with Portland as its capital. They dedicated their country to the ideals of sustainability, work ethic, and frugality. The Portlanders fought valiantly, but were overwhelmed by the sheer amount of soldiers the US government sent to the meat grinder. The leaders, including Ted Kaczynski and Edward Abbey, were executed by hanging on live television. The rest of the Portland Rebels were sent to be worked to death on the Idaho superfarms. This did not stop monkey-wrenchers and other eco-terrorists from acting, though, but they became a lot quieter. It was whispered throughout the northwest that the Canadian government was covertly funding and training an army of rebels to fight the shrinking administration in Washington. 

They weren’t the only rebels, however. Beginning in 1997, the Governor of Alabama tarnished Dr. Martin Luther King’s legacy and reinstated a twisted form of agricultural segregation by only employing African Americans as farm hands. Alabama, while working closely with the burgeoning Food, Inc, was not directed by their corporate partner to enact this policy. Food, Inc did not care, however: as long as their soy and lentil were still grown, the Governor could act how he wished. What they did not expect however was how harshly the farm hands were worked, and in turn, the increase in production. Food, Inc was so pleased that they started lobbying for the use of convicts to supplement the numbers of workers. The Governor immediately expanded the scrutiny of the law to make just about anything illegal and started working men to death by the hundreds. For this, Food, Inc rewarded him with a spot on the Board of Directors, making the Governor the richest man in the South. 

This was around the time when the line between government and corporation began to blur. As the Governor left for New York to live in a (relatively) opulent apartment, the Food, Inc effectively took over what was left of the South. Food, Inc, always thinking about the bottom line, gave their employees effective reign over how they dealt with their “volunteers”. Many of the farm directors embraced the discrimination, as they found it therapeutic taking out their frustrations on their workers - as long as someone was below them, they could tolerate the deteriorating conditions. After one rotgut binge, a certain farm director in Mississippi decided to bring back the ideals of the Confederacy. He later declared that the “Northern Yankees have tainted the world with their industrial rot and the agrarian Golden Circle must now be reformed”. 

https://youtu.be/5nCuz4qjTro?si=pEUYD6Hd6bBnosa2 

The second Confederacy was much smaller than its previous iteration. Much of the South was an arid desert by 2000, and the rest of it dedicated to intensive agriculture that was bleeding the land dry. After a slave revolt (for the workers by this point were essentially slaves in all but name), the Black Panther Party organized and started sabotaging the southern farms in the same way that the AVA was doing in the Rust Belt and the Cascadian armies in the Northwest. 


Klan members ambushing a Democratic representative outside Memphis, Tennessee. Date unknown. 

The Federal Government, officially treating the operation as a Civil War, rallied the unemployed and sent them off to fight the rebels, just as they were doing in the Rust Belt and the Northwest. However, by 2005, once it became clear that the agricultural value of the south had dried up and the two parties were fighting as a result of racial tension only, the support from Washington and New York dried up. 

By 2022, 99% of the land south of the Mason-Dixon Line was depopulated. Most of the south was now a dumping ground for the vast amounts of waste from the cities (The United States was not as desperate as China, thankfully). In 2023, the Klan, secretly funded by Food, Inc (as they were unknowingly providing them with a fresh supply of corpses) and supported by the GAR, was finally defeated by the Panthers, supported by Canada and the USSR. The Governor of Mississippi demanded that the state lines be redrawn and that the government help rebuild the south. 

There was no response. 

Internal forces were not the only threat the United States faced, however. An old ally and their longest trading partner, Mexico, had become a resurgent enemy. Mexico was a polite term for the loose confederation of Cartels that had effectively ruled all of Central America since 2012. Millions were crossing the border into the United States in an attempt to escape to Canada. “Esclavitud o muerte”, the refugees' cries fell upon deaf ears. 

There was no debate, not even a consideration in Congress that they should be let in. The nation’s population was 500 million and climbing, with more than half of that being unemployed, uneducated, starving poor. Why would they let in yet more? It’s a good thing that the Alliance of Nations was too busy dealing with meaningless debate on birth control, or lest they might have even given the United States a slap on the wrist for the El Paso Massacre. The Soviet Union sent a scathing letter to Washington, but it was immediately recycled, and its ink scrubbed to be used to draft an internal memo about how Jarret was a god among men. 

On the night of May 2nd, 2013, a group of a quarter million starving Mexican refugees were hiding in the ruined cities of El Paso. El Paso had been declared “unsustainable” in 2007 and had long since been abandoned. Early in the morning, before the deadly heat of the sun had appeared in the sky, a group of 30,000 National Guardsmen appeared and sealed all entrances to the town. Those that woke up and tried to escape were shot. Some of the more violent members of the army lynched the immigrants, others simply watched as they desperately tried to escape the rising heat. There were even rumors of cannibalism and the mutilation of a Mexican child. Since the city was declared abandoned, excessive force was used, with the city being destroyed by explosives two days later. The National Guardsmen were never tried for their crimes. 

Yet, the Massacre did little to stem the tide of desperate people looking for somewhere, anywhere to go. Groups of Klan members, fleeing the Panthers, took to torturing, killing, and eventually eating the fleeing Mexicans. They became like vampires: hunting for blood only during the cool hours of the night, and hiding in damp, humid caves by day. And yet, still they came. The Klan even started selling the refugees back to the cartels, which in turn gave the Klan access to the powerful drug known as Bromista that they used to escape from the harsh, bleak reality of a world gripped by disease, hunger and heat. 

Other groups began to coalesce in the marginally more hospitable Northeast. While New England was one of the most hospitable parts of the nation left, its economy had been in greater shambles than most regions since the Red Decades. Manufacturing had largely moved overseas or to other parts of the country in prior decades, and the service industry was decimated by the wide scale poverty of its swollen population. Boston, by 2005 a city of over 4 million people, had its shipping industry destroyed by biblical floods, that now happened multiple times a year. By the 2020s the region, still heavily leaning democrat, had one of the leading unemployment rates in the country. As some voices in the senate quietly whispered about how New England was a burden, many in the region decided to relieve the nation of said burden. The largest group, calling themselves ‘The Pilgrims’ aimed to achieve succession, either for their own sakes, or to join Canada, where conditions were perceived as much better. The Pilgrims were largely apolitical, in the sense that they required no major affiliation to join. Neo-Nazis and radical communists worked alongside Jewish libertarians and Republicans. 


Boston police arresting suspected Pilgrims outside a University in Cambridge, 2016

The group’s aim since its founding in 2014 had been to make New England more trouble than it was worth to the federal government. Rail lines to New York (strangely one of the largest employers by this time) were cut, the last forests of the northern states were burned, making a scarce energy source and building material even more rare. By 2020, with the Pilgrims growing but still largely a disregarded fringe group, they moved to ‘Tarring and feathering’, a euphemism for assassination of politicians. Here they enjoyed some success, managing to wound a governor and kill a Massachusetts representative in that year alone. But the government had long been a plutocracy in all but name, the wealthy could easily find hired help in a place where people making minimum wage were murdered to free up their positions. By 2022 the Pilgrims were forced back underground, the military having stamped out much of their leadership, while New England politicians now never left their mansions and penthouses without a small army of security. The last effort from the place where American independence had been born to enact political change was fizzled out.

Part 2-1
A Fractured World: The Starving Tiger
Section 1: The Grand Tragedy of Chenism
Excerpt from “Icarus: The Chinese Twilight” by K. Nakamura-Belov, published by Samurai Press, New Tokyo, 919 ASJ

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZYIqOAtgomQ&t=2801s 
By 2023, China was barely a nation. 

The once lush, fertile plains in East China had been corrupted by Chairman Chen’s industrial revolution. Taiwan had been invaded, squeezed for all it was worth, and then left to eat itself. Mongolia was turned into the new heart of China after agriculture became impossible. Korea had morphed into one massive weapons factory. Indochina had been gutted and left to dry. And on top of it all, China was eating itself to death. 

How did China get this way? 

In 1971, a plot by Lin Biao and several other prominent members of the Chinese elite led to Mao Zedong to be successfully assassinated on September 11th, 1971. Officially, it was to save the Chinese people from the madness of the Cultural Revolution. While Lin originally was poised to take control of China, Chen Qiang, one of the conspirators, carefully outmaneuvered Lin Biao and became the new Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party. What exactly he said to get Lin to step down is unknown, but afterwards, Lin was notably quiet in all of his public appearances. 

Chen Qiang was a mysterious individual, with some believing that he held a prominent and lofty position in the Beiyang Government, but never joined the KMT. He remained sympathetic to the CCP, though in the 1960s he did something to get on the wrong side of Mao and was wiped from history. His true life from before the 1971 coup was relatively unknown, though records did survive confirming a desk clerk in Beijing was named Chen Qiang. 

According to his official autobiography, Chen Qiang was born on August 8, 1908. He was the oldest of a family of nine kids, with his parents being a hard working farmer and a dutiful midwife. Chen worked hard throughout his life, eventually becoming a well-known entertainer in Shanghai, before being captured by the Japanese in 1940. He survived by dancing for his captors, and telling them intricate stories to spare him from being the plaything of a sadistic officer. On February 6, 1945, he was liberated by a group of CCP guerillas, who were coincidentally under Lin Biao’s command. Even his official autobiography glossed over the years between 1945 and 1965, where he was imprisoned for “speaking out against the madness of Mao Zedong”. Lin Biao, who was looking for allies in his struggle against Mao, “overturned every stone” until he found his “heaven-sent ally”. 

To date, no evidence has been found to corroborate these claims. 

This new leader would oversee the creation of the single most important document in the 20th century: the Shanghai Accords. It was the Shanghai Accords, negotiated by Chairman Chen Qiang and President Richard Nixon, that granted the world 16 years of unprecedented opulence and decadence… as long as you weren’t being worked to death in a Chinese Superfactory. 

Chinese Superfactories were incredibly dangerous places. Industrial output was their only goal. Safety was an afterthought, if it even was a thought at all. This is partly why Chairman Chen advocated for families to have as many kids as possible: the mortality rate in a Chinese Superfactory ensured that over a third of all Chinese wouldn’t make it past the age of thirty. What’s a few hundred thousand deaths when families had at least ten kids? Such a morbid mindset required a radical shift in cultural thinking. 1973 is traced back to the year that Chairman Chen began to reinvent the Cultural Revolution to suit his own purposes. One scholar in London called it a “cultural devolution”, though the scholar was quickly removed from the institution so as to not risk the unprecedented opulence of the Shanghai Accords.

This new Cultural Revolution demanded that if China was to take her rightful place, her people must be willing to devote themselves entirely to furthering her goals, and only by making Chairman Chen proud could they do that. One such way was having lots of kids, for while each kid was one more mouth to feed, it was two more hands to work the fields, or two more hands to operate machinery, or two more hands to hold a gun. There were some that were, in Chen’s own words, “slow” to adapt, but the Red Guard quickly put a stop to this. Reports of factories being burned to the ground for not meeting production quotas was Soviet propaganda, after all!

China would eventually set up 31 “Special Industrial Zones”, or areas completely dedicated to industrial Megafactories without any consideration for the environment, living conditions or safety. Each SIZ had at least 31 Megafactories, with each Megafactory employing over 100,000 workers. These SIZs also had dedicated, if cheaply made, housing for the workers, along with places for food and cheap entertainment. Trade schools existed in some SIZs to train the children of workers to be the next generation of industrial servants. 

At first, the Chinese People welcomed these changes: Chairman Mao was soon rebranded as an Enemy of the People much like how Stalin was denounced during the Khrushchev thaw. All of the starvation and misery that took place during the 50s and 60s, and even some of the atrocities committed by Japan in WW2, were laid squarely at his feet. “The Chairman is dead, long live the Chairman!”, the people cried. 

This was Chairman Chen’s first step to modernizing China and getting it the respect it deserved. He needed to change its image: to make China not only the most powerful nation on earth, but the most invaluable. He needed to make China essential to everyday life for everyone on Earth. 

There are some who say he did this too well. 

After Chiang Kai-Shek’s head mysteriously exploded from a totally-not-CIA-sniper bullet, Chairman Chen spent an entire year trying to woo Taiwan back into union with the mainland. Taiwan, bitter that they had been removed from the UN and its Security Council, refused. None would openly protest this, however, as the Shanghai Accords prohibited any nation from even mentioning Taiwan, or else permanently lose their access to cheap, ludicrously affordable Chinese goods. 

And so, Chairman Chen turned his attention back towards China in an attempt to reverse the damage done by his predecessor. Mao had executed landlords by the millions, and now over 90% of the country was owned by the peasants. This was good in theory, he thought, however a vast majority of these peasants had no experience in land ownership and the responsibilities that came with it. By 1974, 90% of the country was once again under control of the State, which began auctioning off land to startups and foreign businesses, though Chinese state-owned businesses were always given priority. Of these new businesses, the most prominent would be 人们的食物, or “People’s Food”[1], an instant noodle company that gained a contract with the Chinese Government so that only their food would be served in the dingy canteens of every Megafactory. 

Chairman Chen, kept a few things from his predecessor, though - anti-intellectualism was one of them. Peasants were deliberately kept uneducated, with scarce access to books outside of technical manuals for the machinery in Megafactories. Literacy rates fell to 7.5% in 1985. 


Stylized poster of Chairman Chen safeguarding the “Second Revolution”, circa 1977

Chairman Chen saw himself as the “architect” of China, and the workers were the tools. Did the tools ever design for the architect? No, it was the other way around, and any “tool” that asked too many questions seemed to mysteriously die in a Liveleak-style industrial accident, be accused as a rightist, or dead in a “riot”, and that was if they were feeling generous. If a worker was being particularly troublesome, a Red Guard would send them to one of the not-so-secret labor camps where they would be worked to death, used as target practice for the Army, and if one report is to be believed, used for organ harvesting in the Black Market. China used this method to exterminate ethnic minorities, with the Uyghurs being wiped out by 1982 and the Tibetans wiped out by 1999 after their failed uprising. Subversives being worked to death for free labor is a concept that a certain American company would be inspired by, finally putting it into practice in the 2000s. 

From 1971-1974 those that were smart enough, such as industrial technicians or university professors, immigrated to the USSR. The USSR, disgusted at what China was becoming, offered lauded positions to Chinese workers who still believed in Mao, Lenin and Marx - as long as they were educated, that is. These escaped intellectuals described the modern hellscape of China, some even saying it was worse than it was under Mao, with children being worked to death in factories for a cup of noodles. A United Nations investigation in 1976 would find that this would be shockingly true: however, China was only let off with a fine and promised to “not do it again”. 

One singular man leading a country, no matter how smart he thinks he is, is never a good idea. Chen kept another policy from Mao: forcing farmers to become factory workers and letting their knowledge on crops go to waste. In 1975, there was a minor famine (minor as in only less than a million died) and Chen realized that more farmhands were required. So rather than send the farmers back to their fields, unemployed city residents were sent to the countryside to toil in the fields being slowly corrupted by pollution. These ineffectual peasants would always produce less each year, and despite some of them being executed for “sabotaging the People’s Harvest”, their replacements were always worse. If the intellectuals were still around, they might suggest that moving the original farmers back from the factories would be more efficient, or even removing the communal steel forges that were used by blacksmiths. 

For every policy of Mao that Chen kept, another would be reversed. The Third Front, a concept championed by Mao, believed that having all of China’s industrial capacity on its coast opened it up to invasion. This was counterproductive to Chen’s vision of China: factories farther from the sea meant more money spent on transportation, and thus higher prices. Who cares if a few million acres of land became permanently polluted - China could always import more food after all, the Shanghai Accords went both ways. Instead, Chairman Chen built over 1000 military bases along their coast, mainly concentrated in areas closer to Taiwan, South Korea, and Japan. This bloated China’s military to obscene levels, with China having over 50 million active personnel in 2000, not to mention the 150 million workers required to keep the bases functioning. This created jobs for the rapidly growing Chinese population, which had adapted to the deadly work in the Megafactories and dropped their mortality rate to only 4% a year. 

Who would invade China? Everyone, said Chen, for everyone shall be jealous of our prosperity. His experiences during the Cultural Revolution and with overthrowing Mao had made him a deeply paranoid man - he always thought that someone would overthrow him. The Communist Party had been repeatedly purged and thinned every year. Lin Biao, his second in command, had no real power and simply rubber stamped all of his policies. It is said that China had a different ambassador every year. These frequent purges are blamed on “Taiwanese Spies”, as that became the most frequent excuse used by the CCP. The sabotage of the Three Gorges Dam? Taiwanese Spies. A Megafactory destroyed in a bombing, killing over 50,000 people? Taiwanese Spies! Previously arable land yielding much less crops? Taiwanese spies, again. 

In the 80s, China’s mentality had shifted to one of complete reverence for Chairman Chen. Those who did not bow to him were shot. Citizens were taught from birth that they owed their entire lives to Chairman Chen, who had saved them from being slaves at the hand of Chairman Mao. That if they worked hard, they could escape the factories and at one point even run their own factory. All they had to do was swear complete and total allegiance to Chairman Chen, who had a portrait in every room by 1983. Soldiers even prayed to Chairman Chen before battle. All the reports of dangerous conditions in factories? Taiwanese propaganda, and anyone who suggested otherwise were agents of Taiwan. The United States was, is, and will always be our stalwart ally and trading partner. China has always been in a trade war with the USSR. 


Richard Nixon and Chen Qiang signing the Shanghai Accords, February 28th, 1972. This is the only surviving photograph of Chen Qiang, being taken by Nixon’s press staff, as in 2026 Chairman Liang Guowei ordered all images of him to be destroyed. 

The rest of the world, of course, was silently watching the deteriorating condition of China. Scientists were loudly shouting to anyone who would listen about the increasing carbon emissions coming from the Megafactories. One report from West Germany even said that at this rate, China’s land would be unable to produce food by 2005. Many would ignore these warnings though, especially those in power in the West. But what could they do? American manufacturing had been declining for decades now. The factories that armed the allies in both world wars had been rusting since 1954. The easiest option was to stay the course, so that is what they did.

The United States and China began a close relationship, comparable to the relationship the US had with the UK. It is said in his state-approved autobiography that Chairman Chen Qiang and President Richard Nixon became close friends. While the Chairman could not attend Nixon’s second inauguration in 1973, as he was busy trying to negotiate with Taiwan, he did attend the inauguration of Winston Morgan in 1976 and Franklin King in 1984. China’s special relationship with the United States was touted as a “communism to capitalism success story”, and the hope was that even the evil Soviet Union could become a major producer on the world stage. At the pressure of both the West and China, the USSR reluctantly started opening up factories for trade in Eastern Europe. 

In a term now called “dollar diplomacy”, Chairman Chen began trading programs to grow China’s image. In 1974, China championed the World Prosperity Alliance, a trading bloc that focused on “spreading capitalism with Chinese Characteristics to nations around the world”. Using tariffs and trade route taxations as leverage, China helped negotiate peace in several countries such as ending the Vietnam War in 1975. These programs caused the world economy to skyrocket. Even as an industrial slave in China, the average quality of life went up. Money that previously went to the subsidization of factories and other industries now went to researching advanced medicines and space travel. Indeed, China became the biggest economy in 1987 worth $4.73 trillion, surpassing the United States[2]. Throughout the 1980s, China led a program of international cooperation to build the first space station. Many nations contributed, such as the United States, the EU, Brazil, Australia, Canada, India, and even the USSR reluctantly participated. The 国际合作与友谊站, or “Station of International Cooperation and Friendship”, was launched on May 16, 1987, a day celebrated as the “day mankind rose up together and touched the stars”. 

But all good things must come to an end. 

By all rights, the world should have ended on that fateful day of June 9th, 1988. Overnight, humankind woke up from the hedonistic dream of Chairman Chen. International trade dried up as a billion barrels of oil burned. The Tokyo Stock Exchange supposedly was the site of a mass suicide of businessmen, while the New York Stock Exchange was closed early as stocks dropped more than 30% in two days. Shanghai faced even worse problems. 

It was said that Chairman Chen did not sleep for a week. His whole plan hinged on the world trading with China, and now, all but the wealthiest countries did not have the money or fuel to transport their goods. If something was not done soon, then his people would be out of a job. If they were out of a job, they would starve. And if they starved, they would revolt. He had seen the brutality of the Chinese Civil War, and the Cultural Revolution, and he knew that soon, he would be on the losing end of the next revolution. 

So Chen turned to his backup plan. While the rest of the world was reeling from the aftermath of the war and the Crash of 1989, China forcibly transitioned to a command economy. Citizens were subsidized by their government to buy their own products, which worked in the short term until they ran out of space. 4M paper was left dumped in alleyways, FulTec microwaves were piled on street corners, and SAPK drugs were popped like candy by workers. He kept telling his people that it was temporary, that true prosperity was just around the corner, that soon the world would be buying Chinese products again. 

A growing number of peasants and party members alike began to feel tricked by Chairman Chen. They had suffered so much in the name of making China a world power, and now after the sudden resurgence of protectionism around the globe, they were treated like a leper. China was desperate to keep its economy running and its people employed. 

In October 1989, in one last hail mary, Chairman Chen was forced to turn to his oldest enemy: the Soviet Union. Sending a shipment of rice in good faith, Chairman Chen pleaded with the Politburo to implement buying their goods into their planned economy. General Secretary Gennady Yanayev laughed in his face. ”You have doomed your people by turning away from Marx, Lenin, and Mao. Your greed is your death,” was all he said. From then on until the Great Death, China and the USSR were bitter enemies, with China increasingly envious of their northern neighbor. 

A normally quiet Lin Biao regaled a frazzled Chairman Chen about the lessons of the past. Back during WW2, both the communists and the nationalists united against a common enemy and endured much hardship for this cause. Chen, who took the story the wrong way, decided to galvanize the Chinese army and forcibly take back Hong Kong and Macau. Because Portugal and the UK were busy dealing with the fallout of the Crash, there were no negotiations. In fact, in Chen’s autobiography, it was said that the citizens of Hong Kong welcomed their Chinese liberators with open arms. The battles were far too easy for the gargantuan Chinese military, with each city falling within a week. Lin Biao was made Supreme Marshal of the People’s Liberation Army for his work in the invasion of two tiny city states. 

It was not enough though. China had been dependent on foreign food imports, mainly from Mongolia and Indochina, and with the Shanghai Accords being just pieces of paper, soon the government was paying exorbitant sums for basic foodstuffs. It was decided that China had no other choice but to forcibly take these countries under their wing. The continuous war of expansion distracted the people long enough and galvanized them against a common enemy. Mongolia was taken over in June 1991, then Laos in November 1991. 

In 1992, the final Olympic Games were held in Beijing. Chairman Chen was excited - he hoped that he would display Chinese glory to the world and countries would resume trading with him again. Many countries did not attend, some out of protest for the Chinese invasions the year prior and some could not afford to go. Some countries did not even exist anymore. Any hope of trading resuming dried up when it was discovered that China had skimped out on a lot of the necessary infrastructure. On top of that, a smog storm from a nearby Megafactory and polluted ground water caused almost 30,000 cancer cases, with nearly 4000 deaths. The humanitarian crisis was unprecedented, and cemented that China’s 15 years of fame had come and gone. 

Then the anti-Taiwan sentiment got out of hand. The crumbling world was far too distracted to intervene in the Third Taiwan Strait Crisis. There was lots of shouting in the UN Headquarters in New York, but no troops could be spared. Over 20 million died in the invasion of Taiwan, and the Red Army routinely pillaged, raped, and massacred any who resisted. Taiwan was followed by Cambodia and Thailand in 1994, then both Vietnams in 1995, and Myanmar in 1996. Lastly, Korea had been turned into a client state in 1997. 

But it was still not enough. 

Even with all the extra resources, labor and land, China was on the verge of collapse. In 1997, the fracturing Chinese economy almost completely caved in. The last of the middle class was wiped out. The Beijing Super Collider Explosion in 1996, and lack of international support, proved without a doubt that China was now an international pariah hurtling towards being a failed state. 90% of the world’s oil supply was gone and China’s economy was running on fumes. Several hundred million had died taking over Indochina, Taiwan and Mongolia, but they were replaced by new births by 2000. China’s economy would break under the pressure unless new material and trade was found. 

And China looked to an area of the world that was quickly turning to anarchy: Africa and South America. In exchange for low prices, China would help industrialize the fragmenting nation states of Africa. With most of its intellectuals having moved to the USSR 20 years ago however, these new industrial sites were grossly inefficient and led to many accidents which in turn polluted Africa even more. Another side effect was that rival factions would fight for control over the production sites, with Chinese workers caught in the crossfire. China began sending troops overseas, starting with just a few soldiers, then squads, then fully armored divisions. In 2007, when an entire fleet disappeared in the Indian Ocean on route to the Congo, that was when the CCP decided to finally pull the plug on The African Plan. The ruins of India were retaliated against of course, but after the Indian-Pakistani war of 2002, there was not much left to retaliate against. 

Things were getting dire. Chairman Chen had passed away from a heart attack in 2003 at age 94, and with his death, the CCP leadership went into free fall. Protests in 2004 against ration reductions were met with martial law and tanks in the streets. The People’s Republic of China went through 14 paramount leaders between 2003 and 2027, each more corrupt and paranoid than the last. The fourth Paramount Leader was very anti-Japan and blamed them for putting China through this 70 year long mess. The second Sino-Japanese war lasted from 2007 to 2010 and had no goal other than to reduce the population. That was the purpose of the war against India, afterall - in a nation of over 3 Billion, the CCP believed they had no choice other than rounding up civilians and executing them… and they were getting close to that point. They had tried other methods, such as implementing a One Child policy in 2006, and spiking the drinking water with a chemical that caused the rate of miscarriages to skyrocket, but it was not enough - there were just too many people. 


A common scene on fields during the Chinese Twilight. Due to the mass die off of animals, the local government has created fake “livestock” to desperately cling to the illusion that China was still full of life. 

It was the start of 2011, under the fifth Paramount Leader, that China would begin to see the true horrors of the world that Chairman Chen had helped to create. In mainland China, the once fertile rice paddies had turned into a giant wasteland of radioactive chemicals and putrid sewage. No vegetation grew at all, the last of it being eaten in 2006. Indochina and Mongolia were struggling to provide food for the billions of ethnic Hans. China had at one point considered invading the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia, but climate change had left them much the same way as India, so there was no point. 

This was when the Fifth Chairman, who was notoriously anti-Taiwan, tried one last ditch effort to save resources for his people: the recycling of human feces as food. In Taiwan exclusively, human waste was recycled and used to feed the starving Taiwanese. This new Siliao went about as well as you could expect it to go. At the very least, Taiwan’s cities didn’t smell like shit for a few months. But after the largest E. Coli outbreak in recorded history occurred in Taipei, the jig was up. 

The Sixth Chairman was left with no choice. 

There was one method that everyone had considered but never actually wanted to do. No one wanted a repeat of the Guangxi Massacre. One last final option, other than starvation. An option that would reserve the Sixth Chairman his own circle in Hell. The oceans were dying, 99% of all wildlife was extinct, vast swathes of the world had been destroyed by forest fires, drought and the Siberian Blight. The poor were literally starving to death on the streets. It was as he watched a scrawny rat eat its own children did he realize what had to be done. 

The Sixth Chairman drafted up Project 444 that day, signed it, and put a bullet in his brain, and on January 1st, 2012, the new Siliao would be distributed and thus would begin the darkest years of humanity’s history. 

Throughout 2012, the CCP leadership would go through a record number of suicides as the party leaders could not live with themselves. Everything they had done, from betraying Mao in 1971, becoming a capitalist puppet state in the 70s and 80s, invading their neighbors and committing war crimes in Taiwan, couping Chen… and all for what? What was the point of it all? What had they gained? The country was literally eating itself to stay alive. This wasn’t life. The forced miscarriages were a mercy at this point. 

The Seventh Chairman also killed himself upon learning what Siliao was truly made out of, and the Eighth Chairman, a veteran of the Vietnam War, saw the pain in his people. It was then when he authorized 正义仁慈计划, or “Project Righteous Mercy”, the development of a biological weapon that would turn his people sterile. He was killed in late 2013, and the Ninth Chairman said there was still hope. That if the glorious People’s Liberation Army was to liberate Australia, they could build the true China. 

Australia, however, had seen the impending climate catastrophe coming all the way back in the 60s, and had prepared themselves better than any other country. Their fleet, long since having switched to nuclear, saw the Chinese attack force from miles away. It is said that the entire PLA Navy fleet is still at the bottom of the ocean, 50 miles from Sydney, Australia. 

After the Ninth Chairman was killed in a coup, each one of his successors would try to galvanize the country to conquer another one, each one failing more and more horribly than the last. In 2015, for the first time ever, China had seen a net decrease in population. 2.9 Billion isn’t a whole lot less than 3 Billion but it was progress. 

When the Truth got out on May 26th, 2019, that Siliao was made from human remains, the population was so jaded, so numb, that most simply didn’t care. A few chose to kill themselves, a few even volunteered to feed their children, but most were so malnourished that they had given up long ago. The CCP quickly assured the population that it was only made out of criminals and counter-revolutionaries, as if that made it any less morbid.

In 2022, it was the 12th Chairman who decided that Project Righteous Mercy didn’t go far enough. The dead had been recycled and consumed so many times now that people were now dying from mineral deficiencies. The only mercy they could receive would be death. However, it must still be merciful, painless, without suffering, for this world had enough suffering as it was. 天堂之眼计划, or “Project Eyes of Heaven”, as it was called, was to be made with great care to ensure that the mass euthanasia would be as quiet and painless as possible. 

As of 2023, Project Eyes of Heaven is still under way. Of the many SIZ China built, only two SIZ are still operating and 23 Megafactories still functioning. And what are they making? China’s final attempt at keeping its national identity. With its fleet lying on the sea bed near Australia, China’s last, best attempt at staying a nation is the invasion of their northern neighbor. The USSR has been extremely hostile towards China, creating a militarized border wall in 2007 and shooting anyone who tried to cross, no questions asked, over a kilometer from the wall. It was only through the swarming of 2.5 billion desperate, starving Chinese could they maybe reclaim their national spirit. Full-on collapse is imminent: many of the surviving nations believe China is partly to blame for the collapse of civilization, for tempting the world with their devilishly cheap goods. Already, parts of the PLA have rebelled and started executing civilians for just existing, mainly in Taiwan. China must make one last desperate push north or risk total collapse. 

[1]  By 2023, People’s Food would own over a third of China’s land. Land that had long lost its agricultural value. 
[2]  The Democrats would use this as a talking point during their 1988 campaign.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Gl5WsXinI4 

Section 2: The Red Army Marches

China expanded its sphere of influence throughout the 1970s and 1980s, and in the 1990s, invaded their neighbors. In the 2000s, pointless wars of attrition were fought for the sole purpose of getting soldiers killed and freeing up resources. 

Mongolia

Mongolia remained closely allied to the USSR. Because the USSR was very anti-Chen until the late 80s, this caused tension with China over its refusal to industrialize. In 1989, Batmönkh stayed in power due to the Crash, and then in 1990, Mongolia tried to formally join the USSR as a republic. The USSR seriously considers letting them join, however they ultimately side against it as they don’t want to risk a war with China at this point, as Soviet troops were withdrawn in 1990 to deal with an uprising in the Balkans. The Invasion is portrayed as bringing Inner Mongolia back into the fold of China. The USSR is against this idea, and while they cannot directly intervene to defend Mongolia in the invasion, they do give aid to the Mongolian rebels. Mongolian rebels are being trained by the USSR to distract and bog down the PLA. 


Two soldiers, one Soviet and one Mongolian, standing in front of an anti-Chinese propaganda poster. Taken sometime in the 1980s. 

Two SIZ are made in Mongolia in the 90s. As the climate warms up, several party leaders make “summer homes” in the cooler climate of Mongolia. As the years progress, they spend more and more time there. Eventually a city is built that is solely for high-ranking administrators, turning into the unofficial capital of China after the unimaginable pollution of Beijing and the explosion of the supercollider. This city is referred to as “New Beijing”. Political dissents are sent across the border where they are executed by Soviet snipers. After 2012, however, they are turned into Siliao. Of the areas China has conquered, Mongolia has the best land for agriculture, as it has a similar climate to Canada and Siberia. By 2023, most of the CCP are operating out of bunkers on the Chinese/Mongolia border. 

Thailand

Thailand is a bit more vengeful about the land it lost in 1946. The 1973 democracy movement succeeds, and is resolved peacefully due to Nixon negotiating it. The new democratic government sought to eliminate the problems plaguing pre-1973 Thailand, including rampant political corruption, curtailed freedoms and income inequality. A series of reforms are passed that incentivize social and economic change. These reforms did little to actually help the population, and instead they traded one corruption for another. Led by greed, politicians were known to be extremely corrupt and easily swayed by bribes. Something as simple as road construction would require at least one bribe in order to be done in an adequate quality. In the 80s Thailand was ruled by a small cadre of elite merchants and politicians who lived an extremely opulent lifestyle. Everytime the people demanded fairer wages, or better working conditions, or any kind of public service, the ruling class would accuse them of being communists and the activists in question would always disappear by totally-not-CIA operatives. 

During this time, the USSR covertly trained communist insurgents and supplied them with weapons. Then comes the Crash of 1988, and the population explodes in a violent revolt led by the Communists. In 1993, the Civil War ended with the Communists in power. They sign a pact of mutual defense with China after the Taiwan invasion, however China invades them a year later to “ensure the people are never betrayed again”. 

China built 2 SIZ in Thailand, both at politically unstable locations. These factories employ a large number of conveniently placed political prisoners. Throughout the Chinese occupation, Thai workers have demonstrated and rebelled on a similar level to the civil unrest in the USA. Notable uprisings have been suppressed in 1998, 2004, 2013 and 2019. By 2023, Thailand is another breadbasket to supply the dying China. The communists in power have more in common with the businessmen in the 70s and 80s than they’d like to admit. Much like the rest of Indochina, the humidity makes it very hard to work during the day and most farmers check their crops at night. 

Taiwan

Taiwan was extremely corrupt, with only fears of Mao and Chen to keep it together. So much so that the government is almost comically corrupt, to the point that people are executed on the street for being ”communist sympathizers”, when actually they didn’t sell someone a hot dog. After the PRC is recognized as the sole heir to China after the Shanghai Accords of 1972, Taiwan is ignored on the world stage until China formally invades them. Even then, most countries only send their condolences. Chiang Kai-Shek was assassinated by an agent of Chen in 1972, but it is never proven. Part of the Shanghai Accords also formally disbar any countries from investigating it. Martial Law was never lifted in 1987, as the KMT were suspicious of Chen’s administration. 

From 1972 to its invasion, Taiwan was an extremely paranoid police state that ruthlessly exploited its citizens. Chairman Chen is equally paranoid of Taiwan, which is why he is so harsh against its population.The worst mega-factories are built in Taiwan as a way to pollute and damage Taiwan’s environment to keep the Taiwanese weak and feeble. 5 SIZ are located here, with one of them designed to pollute the environment as efficiently as possible in a unique form of environmental warfare. 25% of the coal that China used until 2009 came from Taiwan, and rare luxury foods like sugar cane were grown until a fire destroyed most plantations in 2007. The PRC views Taiwanese as corrupted by Japan and subhuman, all the way until 2023. In 2023, with most of its resources extracted, China believes that Taiwan is more trouble than it’s worth and simply kills all of its residents to turn them into Siliao for the mainland. 

Cambodia

In the 1960s, Cambodia sided with South Vietnam in the Vietnam war. However, as the bloodthirsty US started bombing VietCong communists hiding in Cambodia and accidentally killing many Cambodians (Called the Blood Tide Massacre), they shifted more towards the communists. The Khmer Rouge was installed, however the Shanghai Accords secured their sovereignty. This meant that there could be no South Vietnam/US incursion into Cambodia. 

Due to the lucrative nature of the Shanghai Accords, the world turned a blind eye to the Cambodian Genocide. Many Cambodians were worked to death in intensive farming plantations to feed the laborers in the Chinese Megafactories. Cambodia didn't get invaded by Vietnam in 1978. Instead, North Vietnam pressures Pol Pot to be less evil against his workers. This led to a peaceful revolution that removed Pol Pot from power in 1979. The workers are treated a bit better (in the sense that dead workers can’t produce anything). 

Throughout the 80s, Cambodia went through a series of liberal reforms that granted its workers better working conditions, healthcare, and less hours, however they were still paid the same to keep the price of their products down. One SIZ is built here in the 80s. Full on peace and reconciliation efforts began in 1988 in Paris, however they were cut short by the Crash of 1988, and Cambodia descended into a civil war between the remnants of the Khmer Rouge and the pro-North Vietnam liberals. Later on, the exiled King and other factions join. As the civil war goes on, more and more land is destroyed. China played all sides, funding and training troops for both the Conservative and Liberal communists. Finally, in 1994, China invades Cambodia on the basis of “internal stability”. 

After China’s invasion, the remnants of the country are reformed into what is essentially a giant plantation, earning it the name “The Banana Republic of the East.” By 2023, Cambodia has been worked to the bone. Only very small amounts of food can be produced now, all of it extremely diseased. Humidity is so bad that people have to work during the night. 


Laos

In 1972, part of the Shanghai Accords, Laos was granted sovereignty from North Vietnam. Both sides of Laos would align with each other and in exchange, US Military forces were to leave it. In 1973-1976, a UN peacekeeping operation engaged in the de-armament of dropped US bombs. While the US withdrew from militarily aiding Laos, they would support them in other ways, such as a lucrative .95:.95 trade deal in textiles. This created a hopeful atmosphere and Suvannaphūmā did not die of a heart attack due to receiving a life-saving medical procedure in 1975. Because of this, however, the communist forces in Laos remain, just underground. They are secretly funded by the USSR. 

Lots of US companies come to Laos to run plantations. There are even reports of corporate espionage between US and China-based companies, using Laos as a battleground. Because of its proximity to other “communist” countries, Laos became a center for western missionary groups. Throughout the 80s there are a series of hostage crises as Christian Missionaries are captured by communist rebels. As Laos became richer, the wealth gap increased dramatically. By the late 80s, the communist forces gained more sympathy. 

After the Crash of 1988, the communist party launched another attack on the government, supported by the USSR, and later in 1990, China. Because the majority of the population were farmers, they managed to survive the initial crash relatively smoothly. But because of this, China invaded them in 1991. By 2023, Laos remains a glorified plantation for China, much like Cambodia, however the food they grow is much healthier due to the lack of ground pollution. Now if only the food didn’t rot in the humidity before reaching the peasantry in mainland China… 

Vietnam

The Vietnam War continued as normal until 1972 where a gradual detente would cause the war to end in 1975. South Korea and other South-East Asian nations send more troops, along with higher morale from US troops, causing the war to continue into a stalemate much like the Korean War instead of a total loss. A group of Maoist loyalists escaped to North Vietnam in 1973, which caused the US to renew and revitalize their war efforts. The Nixon administration claims it is the last remnant of “true communism” and is determined to stamp it out, afterwards they can worry about fixing the Soviet Union. 


Richard Nixon rallies US troops for a renewed defence of Hanoi, photographed 1974

This new system of Two Vietnams were both heavily supported by China, but only after the Maoist insurgency ended. China builds one SIZ in each Vietnam and then opens up a port deal. Vietnam is touted as a “communist to capitalist” success story by the USA and China, though in China they refer to it as “capitalism with Chinese characteristics”. Because of the enormous success of Chenism in Vietnam, many more SIZs are built in both Vietnams. North Vietnam ends up with 7, while South Vietnam ends up with 4. Throughout the 80s, the two Vietnams are referred to as Little China, and as they work together to utilize their industrial capacity, they enter negotiations to reunify. On April 4th, 1987, Vietnam formally reunited in a ceremony overseen by President King, Former President Nixon, and Chairman Chen. 

Because Vietnam was so closely modeled on China, they were hit particularly hard in 1988. Overnight, their industry dried up and was replaced by a lackluster agricultural system in the south. In 1989, a civil war began once again between the North and the South, except this time it was about the distribution of arable land. 

This was a wake up call to China, who saw their future in Vietnam if they didn’t keep their factories running and people employed. They would need resources, and that is where the plan to revitalize Africa came in. 

As the Civil War progressed, the hardcore Maoist faction re-emerged which caused Chairman Chen to launch an invasion. Vietnam then suffered much like Taiwan, turning into a police state, and the little arable land it had was exploited until the rising sea took over 90% of its land. By 2023, Vietnam is as thin as Chile and has no agricultural value to China. Its Venice-style port towns are used to ship crops from Indochina to the rest of China. 

Myanmar

In 1973, China began trying to suggest Myanmar implement Chenist reforms to their path to Burmese Socialism. Unlike a lot of the other countries in Indochina, they ended up resisting the lure of Chenism. This caused much of Myanmar’s history to go more or less uneventfully. The leader of Myanmar, known as the General, ruled Myanmar all the way up to 1990, where he was killed by a group of angry peasants who felt that he wasn’t going far enough to help them during the Red Decades. After this, the army took over Myanmar and ruled it with an iron first for 6 years, rigorously exploiting the land with intensive farming. Unlike the other countries in Indochina, the war with Myanmar wasn’t strictly about resources but about distracting their population from the starvation, poverty and industrial pollution that was starting to plague China. The fact that Myanmar had some agricultural value was simply a bonus. 

(North) Korea

North Korea remained just as isolated as it always was. After the 1971 Coup, they form closer ties to the USSR. This means that North Korea never became Chenist. After the Crash of 1988, and seeing how weak the US’s response to USSR’s invasions of Iran and Afganistan, Kim Il-Sung launched an invasion into South Korea. In 1992, after Kim Il-Sung’s death, his successor was much weaker, and because of that, the KPA led a coup on November 13th, 1997. This new dictatorship gets support from China in exchange for North Korea’s vast supplies of natural gas and coal. China set up environmentally devastating mining operations in the 90s to access these resources, tearing up huge amounts of the countryside for access to rare minerals and coal. This caused huge famines throughout the early 2000s, but despite this, North Korea is still barely capable of agriculture. In 2023, North Korea is the closest thing to China at the height of Chenism in 1987. Its industry remains fully functional, with the worst air pollution in the world as of January 1, 2024. Three SIZ are located here, and as of 2023, all fully functioning factories are located here. During the Great Death, North Korea is bombarded with nukes by the USSR - an ironic end considering how they chose their northern neighbor over their western one.

(South) Korea

South Korea is extremely anti-communist and anti-Japan. So anti-Japan, in fact, that placing tariffs on Japanese products were some of the first laws passed by the government after the Korean War, all the way back in 1953. South Korean police squads would regularly patrol the streets to execute suspected “communists” with the full support of J. Edgar Hoover and Joseph McCarthy. This rabid anti-communist mentality caused many more people to enlist in the army to fight in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War, contributing to the Vietnam Stalemate of 1972. Presidential elections have been rigged by the CIA since 1948. Because of this, there was no reform in 1960 and Rhee was kept as president until his death in 1971. Trade unions were also outlawed in 1964. South Korea’s first Five Year Economic Plan, based on massive amounts of exports to industrialize the nation, is actually what inspired Chairman Chen to have a similar plan, just on an absolutely colossal scale. Education and industrialization was encouraged, as it was thought that an educated worker could bring the country out of its agrarian age.  Because of its staunch anti-communist views, it received extra support from the US until 1972 when the US became very lax with China. This was seen as a massive betrayal by South Korea and was the start of their anti-US sentiment. In 1974, a large rebellion broke out as the populace no longer views the Communist world as a threat. Nixon heads to Seoul to help negotiate and reaches an agreement to help protect South Korea from the North, in exchange for 1:1 trade deals on everything. The CIA would also help keep the new President in power. Lots of the extremely environmentally damaging chemicals used in the mass production of consumer goods were developed in South Korea in the 1970s. 

South Korea opposed Chenism: at first. But like Japan, they would give in during the 1980s and would have many factories set up in China to produce their products. In fact, in mainland China, an entire SIZ is dedicated just to South Korean products. In the 1980s, after South Korea negotiated with China on the building of several megafactories, there were widespread protests as the Korean people had felt they had been betrayed by the government. This led to martial law being declared on December 12th, 1980. The rest of the government of South Korea, all coincidently shareholders of the biggest corporations of Korea, did not impeach the president for this sudden change of heart. They did not even reprimand him when he lifted tariffs on Japanese products and entered trade negotiations with them. In 1983, South Korea and North Korea entered talks about re-unifying, entering a short-lived trading agreement where the North would give the South coal and the South would give the North farming equipment. The Crash of 1988 renewed fears of communism and the talks ceased. 

After the Crash and the US withdrawing support, the government doubled down on their authoritarian regime. Tariffs on Japanese products were reintroduced. Due to the price of transportation, trade with China dried up, and the current administration enacted policies to try to rebuild South Korea’s industry. None of this would have any effect, as South Korea fell to civil war and invasion by the North later that year. After the Chinese annexation, South Korea is still ruled by vengeful North Koreans. It is the second worst place in China after Taiwan (which says a lot). South Korea has a lot of mineral resources, which China uses for the production of weaponry. About half of South Korea’s arable land is damaged by the pollution. Only one SIZ is built here. By 2023, most male South Koreans have been worked to death by their resentful North Korean masters. In China most concubines are South Korean. 

India

China’s war with India was the first war that was solely for causing its soldiers to die. India’s huge population caused it to fracture into civil war in the late 90s, which caused large parts of the country to descend into anarchy and warlordism. The parts of the country that remained under control by the government, mainly centered along the Ganges river and the coast, were at constant odds with Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Pakistan over fishing rights. Bangladesh was annexed by India in 1999, and Sri Lanka the year after. In 2001, the Pakistani Navy torpedoed a civilian Indian fishing boat and claimed that it was a spy vessel. This escalated into full-blown conventional war, with Pakistani troops burning wheat fields and killing cows. India’s dictator, driven over the edge at the news of his family being burned alive in his mansion, flipped the switch and nuked Pakistan. Pakistan nuked them back, and while India was able to destroy a vast majority of the nukes in the initial strikes, the river Ganges was permanently tainted with radioactive particles. 

After the disappearance of an entire fleet of Chinese vessels in 2007 (suspected to be a result of Indian pirates), China invaded India and removed the aging dictator from power. India was plunged into absolute anarchy after that, with a small series of independent communities lining the coast and clustered in Sri Lanka. As the pollution and radioactivity caused more and more land to become unusable, more and more cancer cases, and more and more deaths from radiation poisoning, there was almost nothing that remained. China plundered what little resources India had left, then began sending soldiers out on deliberate suicide missions into the radioactive wasteland of India, Pakistan, and Bangledesh. The Fourth Chairman came up with the idea of using the remaining city-states as target practice for military exercises, and the survivors of the Indian-Pakistani war were routinely subject to war crimes that would make the Taiwanese jealous. 

In 2014, an unexpected fleet arrived: the US military, waving the Food, Inc flag. The Food, Inc, looking for materials to keep their factories running, had come to pick over the radioactive slag heap that was once India. They made a lucrative deal with the Indians: precious metals in exchange for their new revolutionary product. The higher ups of Food, Inc had long suspected what the true ingredient of Siliao was, and always looking to cut costs, had decided to test out the efficiency of using recycled human corpses as a filler. And India was where Ration Omega was originally tested. China had considered engaging in war with Food, Inc, as it would be a surefire way to get rid of a couple million surplus Chinese, however there was no telling if the USA still had functional nuclear weapons. A nuclear war would for sure reduce the population significantly, but this was still seen as too extreme at this point. The 10th Chairman felt that China could still survive if she held on just a little longer. 

Japan

The war with Japan was officially about fishing rights. Some in the PLA had even claimed it was revenge for WW2. Under the Fourth Chairman, China sent waves after waves of Chinese soldiers across the sea to die in the Japanese Islands. Japan was a very stubborn country - they were starving, but very slowly and politely. Many elders had voluntarily followed the Emperor’s example and had committed mass suicide in 2006 to free up resources for the younger generations, however with this sacrifice came a massive loss of knowledge. Japan was falling apart at the seams, with industrial accidents happening before the overworked and under-educated Steward Society could stop them. And this was on top of the almost incomprehensible pollution that occurred before the Crash of 1988: over a half of people under 25 had lost eyesight in one or both of their eyes from cataracts forming. 

But again, Japan was stubborn. Wave after wave of Chinese invaders crashed upon their shores, and many sacrificed themselves for the good of their countrymen. Japan had been slow to re-arm itself, so many defenders were left to fight hand-to-hand or with WW2-era officer swords. Japan developed a special martial art for fighting in the trenches: Tōtoki unagi no michi, or “The Way of the Honorable Eel”. These soldiers were treated with the utmost reverence by their fellow citizens, and were given special privileges regarding their calorie rations. As Japan began rearming itself, however, the Chinese began being pushed further back until finally being pushed out of the home islands by 2009. Throughout 2010, Chinese warships only managed to make three landings, the rest of the vessels were sunk at sea. In 2011, after Japan was hit by a devastating earthquake that ruined much of the fragile metropolitan landscape, the CCP considered a proper invasion, however that would defeat the entire purpose of the phoney war: to reduce China’s population and maintain their economy making war material. 

Australia

Australia was uniquely prepared for the gradual end of civilization. While other countries like Iceland, New Zealand, Canada, the Nordic Union and the USSR were hit the softest because of their low populations, small population densities and cool climates, Australia had been dealing with wildfires, droughts and desertification long before it was impacting the rest of the world. Australia had always been regarded as “that funny land down under”, as they were reluctant to trade with China after the advent of Chenism. They were also the only country to legalize birth control on a massive scale in 1975, and also the only major country to outlaw Chlorofluorocarbons during the 80s. After extensive research into the causes of the Three Mile Island disaster, they were also the only country to not outright ban nuclear power. 

When the Crash of 1988 came around, Australia was unfazed, aside from completely banning immigration. 

Throughout the Red Decades, Australia had developed a healthy trading relationship with New Zealand, and thus only suffered from a permanent recession rather than a full on depression. The government enacted a policy of completely abandoning the countryside for complete urbanization, much like the USA, however Australia did it in a much more deliberate and controlled manner. Internal migrants would only be allowed into the cities if there was space for them. As more and more citizens were displaced, massive 40-story tall apartment buildings, colloquially known as “Hawke-Blocs[1]”, were built. 

Years of wildfire and drought had forced Australian cities to have uniquely open and spacious designs using fire-retardant materials to reduce the risk of fires. They weren’t foolproof, however - Darwin was completely burnt to a crisp during the Great Fire of 2005. Irrigation was also integrated into cities to create “districts” from which water could be drawn from to create barriers against active fires. People’s lawns were turned into community gardens much like the wartime victory gardens of WW2. And slowly, wind and solar power was implemented into the cities. 


An Australian Hawke-Class Nuclear Dreadnaught being repaired and refueled at a Sydney drydock. Photo taken in 2014, immediately after the sinking of the PLA fleet.

As more and more of the Outback was overtaken by climate change, more and more citizens were internally displaced and by 2010, much of the country was abandoned. Australia had been concentrated into 15 “mega cities”, each one with about 3 million citizens. With so much of the population in such a small area, the government was worried they might be vulnerable to attack. The Australian Navy was one of the most efficient in the world (second only to the USSR’s), having adopted nuclear engines around the early 1990s. While initially small, they escorted merchant vessels to and from Perth and New Zealand. After a hostage situation of an Australian merchant in 2003 off the coast of Wellington, however, both the New Zealand and Australian governments adopted a “shoot first, ask questions later” policy. In 2010, the Australian Navy was massively increased and began routine patrols around the coast of Australia, with New Zealand following suit in 2011. 

It was then no surprise when the entire Chinese Navy was sunken off the coast of Sydney on April 4th, 2014. Both Australia and New Zealand’s militaries had been on high alert due to the increasing number of refugees fleeing from the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia. New Zealand’s Navy had been patrolling on the opposite side of New Zealand at the time, so Australia was alone. It was not a problem, however - the fleet of 150 dreadnaughts, staffed by 15,000 well-fed, well-educated and well-disciplined Australian sailors decimated the entire PLA Navy over the course of four hours. By the time that New Zealand reinforcements arrived, the battle was already over. 13 ships were lost on the Australian side, and it is because of that number that the Australians fought with such ferocity. There was no more room on the ship, so to speak, and Australia had long kept a policy of taking no prisoners. 

China

And so, with no options left, China turned inwards on itself. 

China had been struggling for almost two decades to keep its people fed and factories running, lest they risk total revolt, and that is exactly what ended up happening. In 2019, a factory in occupied Myanmar was burned down in an open declaration of war from the long-thought dead Maoist faction of the CCP. This was followed by waves of starving farmers taking up arms in Indochina and burning crop fields. 

The PLA, fractured and humiliated, was called in to regain order. However, more than half of the soldiers ended up defecting and joining the rebel faction. As the Maoist anarchy spread through Southeastern Asia, the terrible truth was revealed: Siliao was PEOPLE!!!!!!!! 

It took a while for the world to spread, but soon entire army divisions rose up in open rebellion. They were the only people in China who were properly fed, and thus had the energy to actually rebel. Even then, the rebel factions were outnumbered almost 5 to 1, and after a few weeks, the CCP was once again under control of the country. A statement was made that Siliao was only made from the flesh of subversives, that no hard working son of Chen was being recycled, but at this point, no one cared. 

[1] Named after the Prime Minister of Australia from 1983-1997, Bob Hawke.
Part 2-1
A Fractured World: The Starving Tiger
Section 1: The Grand Tragedy of Chenism
Excerpt from “Icarus: The Chinese Twilight” by K. Nakamura-Belov, published by Samurai Press, New Tokyo, 919 ASJ

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZYIqOAtgomQ&t=2801s 
By 2023, China was barely a nation. 

The once lush, fertile plains in East China had been corrupted by Chairman Chen’s industrial revolution. Taiwan had been invaded, squeezed for all it was worth, and then left to eat itself. Mongolia was turned into the new heart of China after agriculture became impossible. Korea had morphed into one massive weapons factory. Indochina had been gutted and left to dry. And on top of it all, China was eating itself to death. 

How did China get this way? 

In 1971, a plot by Lin Biao and several other prominent members of the Chinese elite led to Mao Zedong to be successfully assassinated on September 11th, 1971. Officially, it was to save the Chinese people from the madness of the Cultural Revolution. While Lin originally was poised to take control of China, Chen Qiang, one of the conspirators, carefully outmaneuvered Lin Biao and became the new Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party. What exactly he said to get Lin to step down is unknown, but afterwards, Lin was notably quiet in all of his public appearances. 

Chen Qiang was a mysterious individual, with some believing that he held a prominent and lofty position in the Beiyang Government, but never joined the KMT. He remained sympathetic to the CCP, though in the 1960s he did something to get on the wrong side of Mao and was wiped from history. His true life from before the 1971 coup was relatively unknown, though records did survive confirming a desk clerk in Beijing was named Chen Qiang. 

According to his official autobiography, Chen Qiang was born on August 8, 1908. He was the oldest of a family of nine kids, with his parents being a hard working farmer and a dutiful midwife. Chen worked hard throughout his life, eventually becoming a well-known entertainer in Shanghai, before being captured by the Japanese in 1940. He survived by dancing for his captors, and telling them intricate stories to spare him from being the plaything of a sadistic officer. On February 6, 1945, he was liberated by a group of CCP guerillas, who were coincidentally under Lin Biao’s command. Even his official autobiography glossed over the years between 1945 and 1965, where he was imprisoned for “speaking out against the madness of Mao Zedong”. Lin Biao, who was looking for allies in his struggle against Mao, “overturned every stone” until he found his “heaven-sent ally”. 

To date, no evidence has been found to corroborate these claims. 

This new leader would oversee the creation of the single most important document in the 20th century: the Shanghai Accords. It was the Shanghai Accords, negotiated by Chairman Chen Qiang and President Richard Nixon, that granted the world 16 years of unprecedented opulence and decadence… as long as you weren’t being worked to death in a Chinese Superfactory. 

Chinese Superfactories were incredibly dangerous places. Industrial output was their only goal. Safety was an afterthought, if it even was a thought at all. This is partly why Chairman Chen advocated for families to have as many kids as possible: the mortality rate in a Chinese Superfactory ensured that over a third of all Chinese wouldn’t make it past the age of thirty. What’s a few hundred thousand deaths when families had at least ten kids? Such a morbid mindset required a radical shift in cultural thinking. 1973 is traced back to the year that Chairman Chen began to reinvent the Cultural Revolution to suit his own purposes. One scholar in London called it a “cultural devolution”, though the scholar was quickly removed from the institution so as to not risk the unprecedented opulence of the Shanghai Accords.

This new Cultural Revolution demanded that if China was to take her rightful place, her people must be willing to devote themselves entirely to furthering her goals, and only by making Chairman Chen proud could they do that. One such way was having lots of kids, for while each kid was one more mouth to feed, it was two more hands to work the fields, or two more hands to operate machinery, or two more hands to hold a gun. There were some that were, in Chen’s own words, “slow” to adapt, but the Red Guard quickly put a stop to this. Reports of factories being burned to the ground for not meeting production quotas was Soviet propaganda, after all!

China would eventually set up 31 “Special Industrial Zones”, or areas completely dedicated to industrial Megafactories without any consideration for the environment, living conditions or safety. Each SIZ had at least 31 Megafactories, with each Megafactory employing over 100,000 workers. These SIZs also had dedicated, if cheaply made, housing for the workers, along with places for food and cheap entertainment. Trade schools existed in some SIZs to train the children of workers to be the next generation of industrial servants. 

At first, the Chinese People welcomed these changes: Chairman Mao was soon rebranded as an Enemy of the People much like how Stalin was denounced during the Khrushchev thaw. All of the starvation and misery that took place during the 50s and 60s, and even some of the atrocities committed by Japan in WW2, were laid squarely at his feet. “The Chairman is dead, long live the Chairman!”, the people cried. 

This was Chairman Chen’s first step to modernizing China and getting it the respect it deserved. He needed to change its image: to make China not only the most powerful nation on earth, but the most invaluable. He needed to make China essential to everyday life for everyone on Earth. 

There are some who say he did this too well. 

After Chiang Kai-Shek’s head mysteriously exploded from a totally-not-CIA-sniper bullet, Chairman Chen spent an entire year trying to woo Taiwan back into union with the mainland. Taiwan, bitter that they had been removed from the UN and its Security Council, refused. None would openly protest this, however, as the Shanghai Accords prohibited any nation from even mentioning Taiwan, or else permanently lose their access to cheap, ludicrously affordable Chinese goods. 

And so, Chairman Chen turned his attention back towards China in an attempt to reverse the damage done by his predecessor. Mao had executed landlords by the millions, and now over 90% of the country was owned by the peasants. This was good in theory, he thought, however a vast majority of these peasants had no experience in land ownership and the responsibilities that came with it. By 1974, 90% of the country was once again under control of the State, which began auctioning off land to startups and foreign businesses, though Chinese state-owned businesses were always given priority. Of these new businesses, the most prominent would be 人们的食物, or “People’s Food”[1], an instant noodle company that gained a contract with the Chinese Government so that only their food would be served in the dingy canteens of every Megafactory. 

Chairman Chen, kept a few things from his predecessor, though - anti-intellectualism was one of them. Peasants were deliberately kept uneducated, with scarce access to books outside of technical manuals for the machinery in Megafactories. Literacy rates fell to 7.5% in 1985. 


Stylized poster of Chairman Chen safeguarding the “Second Revolution”, circa 1977

Chairman Chen saw himself as the “architect” of China, and the workers were the tools. Did the tools ever design for the architect? No, it was the other way around, and any “tool” that asked too many questions seemed to mysteriously die in a Liveleak-style industrial accident, be accused as a rightist, or dead in a “riot”, and that was if they were feeling generous. If a worker was being particularly troublesome, a Red Guard would send them to one of the not-so-secret labor camps where they would be worked to death, used as target practice for the Army, and if one report is to be believed, used for organ harvesting in the Black Market. China used this method to exterminate ethnic minorities, with the Uyghurs being wiped out by 1982 and the Tibetans wiped out by 1999 after their failed uprising. Subversives being worked to death for free labor is a concept that a certain American company would be inspired by, finally putting it into practice in the 2000s. 

From 1971-1974 those that were smart enough, such as industrial technicians or university professors, immigrated to the USSR. The USSR, disgusted at what China was becoming, offered lauded positions to Chinese workers who still believed in Mao, Lenin and Marx - as long as they were educated, that is. These escaped intellectuals described the modern hellscape of China, some even saying it was worse than it was under Mao, with children being worked to death in factories for a cup of noodles. A United Nations investigation in 1976 would find that this would be shockingly true: however, China was only let off with a fine and promised to “not do it again”. 

One singular man leading a country, no matter how smart he thinks he is, is never a good idea. Chen kept another policy from Mao: forcing farmers to become factory workers and letting their knowledge on crops go to waste. In 1975, there was a minor famine (minor as in only less than a million died) and Chen realized that more farmhands were required. So rather than send the farmers back to their fields, unemployed city residents were sent to the countryside to toil in the fields being slowly corrupted by pollution. These ineffectual peasants would always produce less each year, and despite some of them being executed for “sabotaging the People’s Harvest”, their replacements were always worse. If the intellectuals were still around, they might suggest that moving the original farmers back from the factories would be more efficient, or even removing the communal steel forges that were used by blacksmiths. 

For every policy of Mao that Chen kept, another would be reversed. The Third Front, a concept championed by Mao, believed that having all of China’s industrial capacity on its coast opened it up to invasion. This was counterproductive to Chen’s vision of China: factories farther from the sea meant more money spent on transportation, and thus higher prices. Who cares if a few million acres of land became permanently polluted - China could always import more food after all, the Shanghai Accords went both ways. Instead, Chairman Chen built over 1000 military bases along their coast, mainly concentrated in areas closer to Taiwan, South Korea, and Japan. This bloated China’s military to obscene levels, with China having over 50 million active personnel in 2000, not to mention the 150 million workers required to keep the bases functioning. This created jobs for the rapidly growing Chinese population, which had adapted to the deadly work in the Megafactories and dropped their mortality rate to only 4% a year. 

Who would invade China? Everyone, said Chen, for everyone shall be jealous of our prosperity. His experiences during the Cultural Revolution and with overthrowing Mao had made him a deeply paranoid man - he always thought that someone would overthrow him. The Communist Party had been repeatedly purged and thinned every year. Lin Biao, his second in command, had no real power and simply rubber stamped all of his policies. It is said that China had a different ambassador every year. These frequent purges are blamed on “Taiwanese Spies”, as that became the most frequent excuse used by the CCP. The sabotage of the Three Gorges Dam? Taiwanese Spies. A Megafactory destroyed in a bombing, killing over 50,000 people? Taiwanese Spies! Previously arable land yielding much less crops? Taiwanese spies, again. 

In the 80s, China’s mentality had shifted to one of complete reverence for Chairman Chen. Those who did not bow to him were shot. Citizens were taught from birth that they owed their entire lives to Chairman Chen, who had saved them from being slaves at the hand of Chairman Mao. That if they worked hard, they could escape the factories and at one point even run their own factory. All they had to do was swear complete and total allegiance to Chairman Chen, who had a portrait in every room by 1983. Soldiers even prayed to Chairman Chen before battle. All the reports of dangerous conditions in factories? Taiwanese propaganda, and anyone who suggested otherwise were agents of Taiwan. The United States was, is, and will always be our stalwart ally and trading partner. China has always been in a trade war with the USSR. 


Richard Nixon and Chen Qiang signing the Shanghai Accords, February 28th, 1972. This is the only surviving photograph of Chen Qiang, being taken by Nixon’s press staff, as in 2026 Chairman Liang Guowei ordered all images of him to be destroyed. 

The rest of the world, of course, was silently watching the deteriorating condition of China. Scientists were loudly shouting to anyone who would listen about the increasing carbon emissions coming from the Megafactories. One report from West Germany even said that at this rate, China’s land would be unable to produce food by 2005. Many would ignore these warnings though, especially those in power in the West. But what could they do? American manufacturing had been declining for decades now. The factories that armed the allies in both world wars had been rusting since 1954. The easiest option was to stay the course, so that is what they did.

The United States and China began a close relationship, comparable to the relationship the US had with the UK. It is said in his state-approved autobiography that Chairman Chen Qiang and President Richard Nixon became close friends. While the Chairman could not attend Nixon’s second inauguration in 1973, as he was busy trying to negotiate with Taiwan, he did attend the inauguration of Winston Morgan in 1976 and Franklin King in 1984. China’s special relationship with the United States was touted as a “communism to capitalism success story”, and the hope was that even the evil Soviet Union could become a major producer on the world stage. At the pressure of both the West and China, the USSR reluctantly started opening up factories for trade in Eastern Europe. 

In a term now called “dollar diplomacy”, Chairman Chen began trading programs to grow China’s image. In 1974, China championed the World Prosperity Alliance, a trading bloc that focused on “spreading capitalism with Chinese Characteristics to nations around the world”. Using tariffs and trade route taxations as leverage, China helped negotiate peace in several countries such as ending the Vietnam War in 1975. These programs caused the world economy to skyrocket. Even as an industrial slave in China, the average quality of life went up. Money that previously went to the subsidization of factories and other industries now went to researching advanced medicines and space travel. Indeed, China became the biggest economy in 1987 worth $4.73 trillion, surpassing the United States[2]. Throughout the 1980s, China led a program of international cooperation to build the first space station. Many nations contributed, such as the United States, the EU, Brazil, Australia, Canada, India, and even the USSR reluctantly participated. The 国际合作与友谊站, or “Station of International Cooperation and Friendship”, was launched on May 16, 1987, a day celebrated as the “day mankind rose up together and touched the stars”. 

But all good things must come to an end. 

By all rights, the world should have ended on that fateful day of June 9th, 1988. Overnight, humankind woke up from the hedonistic dream of Chairman Chen. International trade dried up as a billion barrels of oil burned. The Tokyo Stock Exchange supposedly was the site of a mass suicide of businessmen, while the New York Stock Exchange was closed early as stocks dropped more than 30% in two days. Shanghai faced even worse problems. 

It was said that Chairman Chen did not sleep for a week. His whole plan hinged on the world trading with China, and now, all but the wealthiest countries did not have the money or fuel to transport their goods. If something was not done soon, then his people would be out of a job. If they were out of a job, they would starve. And if they starved, they would revolt. He had seen the brutality of the Chinese Civil War, and the Cultural Revolution, and he knew that soon, he would be on the losing end of the next revolution. 

So Chen turned to his backup plan. While the rest of the world was reeling from the aftermath of the war and the Crash of 1989, China forcibly transitioned to a command economy. Citizens were subsidized by their government to buy their own products, which worked in the short term until they ran out of space. 4M paper was left dumped in alleyways, FulTec microwaves were piled on street corners, and SAPK drugs were popped like candy by workers. He kept telling his people that it was temporary, that true prosperity was just around the corner, that soon the world would be buying Chinese products again. 

A growing number of peasants and party members alike began to feel tricked by Chairman Chen. They had suffered so much in the name of making China a world power, and now after the sudden resurgence of protectionism around the globe, they were treated like a leper. China was desperate to keep its economy running and its people employed. 

In October 1989, in one last hail mary, Chairman Chen was forced to turn to his oldest enemy: the Soviet Union. Sending a shipment of rice in good faith, Chairman Chen pleaded with the Politburo to implement buying their goods into their planned economy. General Secretary Gennady Yanayev laughed in his face. ”You have doomed your people by turning away from Marx, Lenin, and Mao. Your greed is your death,” was all he said. From then on until the Great Death, China and the USSR were bitter enemies, with China increasingly envious of their northern neighbor. 

A normally quiet Lin Biao regaled a frazzled Chairman Chen about the lessons of the past. Back during WW2, both the communists and the nationalists united against a common enemy and endured much hardship for this cause. Chen, who took the story the wrong way, decided to galvanize the Chinese army and forcibly take back Hong Kong and Macau. Because Portugal and the UK were busy dealing with the fallout of the Crash, there were no negotiations. In fact, in Chen’s autobiography, it was said that the citizens of Hong Kong welcomed their Chinese liberators with open arms. The battles were far too easy for the gargantuan Chinese military, with each city falling within a week. Lin Biao was made Supreme Marshal of the People’s Liberation Army for his work in the invasion of two tiny city states. 

It was not enough though. China had been dependent on foreign food imports, mainly from Mongolia and Indochina, and with the Shanghai Accords being just pieces of paper, soon the government was paying exorbitant sums for basic foodstuffs. It was decided that China had no other choice but to forcibly take these countries under their wing. The continuous war of expansion distracted the people long enough and galvanized them against a common enemy. Mongolia was taken over in June 1991, then Laos in November 1991. 

In 1992, the final Olympic Games were held in Beijing. Chairman Chen was excited - he hoped that he would display Chinese glory to the world and countries would resume trading with him again. Many countries did not attend, some out of protest for the Chinese invasions the year prior and some could not afford to go. Some countries did not even exist anymore. Any hope of trading resuming dried up when it was discovered that China had skimped out on a lot of the necessary infrastructure. On top of that, a smog storm from a nearby Megafactory and polluted ground water caused almost 30,000 cancer cases, with nearly 4000 deaths. The humanitarian crisis was unprecedented, and cemented that China’s 15 years of fame had come and gone. 

Then the anti-Taiwan sentiment got out of hand. The crumbling world was far too distracted to intervene in the Third Taiwan Strait Crisis. There was lots of shouting in the UN Headquarters in New York, but no troops could be spared. Over 20 million died in the invasion of Taiwan, and the Red Army routinely pillaged, raped, and massacred any who resisted. Taiwan was followed by Cambodia and Thailand in 1994, then both Vietnams in 1995, and Myanmar in 1996. Lastly, Korea had been turned into a client state in 1997. 

But it was still not enough. 

Even with all the extra resources, labor and land, China was on the verge of collapse. In 1997, the fracturing Chinese economy almost completely caved in. The last of the middle class was wiped out. The Beijing Super Collider Explosion in 1996, and lack of international support, proved without a doubt that China was now an international pariah hurtling towards being a failed state. 90% of the world’s oil supply was gone and China’s economy was running on fumes. Several hundred million had died taking over Indochina, Taiwan and Mongolia, but they were replaced by new births by 2000. China’s economy would break under the pressure unless new material and trade was found. 

And China looked to an area of the world that was quickly turning to anarchy: Africa and South America. In exchange for low prices, China would help industrialize the fragmenting nation states of Africa. With most of its intellectuals having moved to the USSR 20 years ago however, these new industrial sites were grossly inefficient and led to many accidents which in turn polluted Africa even more. Another side effect was that rival factions would fight for control over the production sites, with Chinese workers caught in the crossfire. China began sending troops overseas, starting with just a few soldiers, then squads, then fully armored divisions. In 2007, when an entire fleet disappeared in the Indian Ocean on route to the Congo, that was when the CCP decided to finally pull the plug on The African Plan. The ruins of India were retaliated against of course, but after the Indian-Pakistani war of 2002, there was not much left to retaliate against. 

Things were getting dire. Chairman Chen had passed away from a heart attack in 2003 at age 94, and with his death, the CCP leadership went into free fall. Protests in 2004 against ration reductions were met with martial law and tanks in the streets. The People’s Republic of China went through 14 paramount leaders between 2003 and 2027, each more corrupt and paranoid than the last. The fourth Paramount Leader was very anti-Japan and blamed them for putting China through this 70 year long mess. The second Sino-Japanese war lasted from 2007 to 2010 and had no goal other than to reduce the population. That was the purpose of the war against India, afterall - in a nation of over 3 Billion, the CCP believed they had no choice other than rounding up civilians and executing them… and they were getting close to that point. They had tried other methods, such as implementing a One Child policy in 2006, and spiking the drinking water with a chemical that caused the rate of miscarriages to skyrocket, but it was not enough - there were just too many people. 


A common scene on fields during the Chinese Twilight. Due to the mass die off of animals, the local government has created fake “livestock” to desperately cling to the illusion that China was still full of life. 

It was the start of 2011, under the fifth Paramount Leader, that China would begin to see the true horrors of the world that Chairman Chen had helped to create. In mainland China, the once fertile rice paddies had turned into a giant wasteland of radioactive chemicals and putrid sewage. No vegetation grew at all, the last of it being eaten in 2006. Indochina and Mongolia were struggling to provide food for the billions of ethnic Hans. China had at one point considered invading the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia, but climate change had left them much the same way as India, so there was no point. 

This was when the Fifth Chairman, who was notoriously anti-Taiwan, tried one last ditch effort to save resources for his people: the recycling of human feces as food. In Taiwan exclusively, human waste was recycled and used to feed the starving Taiwanese. This new Siliao went about as well as you could expect it to go. At the very least, Taiwan’s cities didn’t smell like shit for a few months. But after the largest E. Coli outbreak in recorded history occurred in Taipei, the jig was up. 

The Sixth Chairman was left with no choice. 

There was one method that everyone had considered but never actually wanted to do. No one wanted a repeat of the Guangxi Massacre. One last final option, other than starvation. An option that would reserve the Sixth Chairman his own circle in Hell. The oceans were dying, 99% of all wildlife was extinct, vast swathes of the world had been destroyed by forest fires, drought and the Siberian Blight. The poor were literally starving to death on the streets. It was as he watched a scrawny rat eat its own children did he realize what had to be done. 

The Sixth Chairman drafted up Project 444 that day, signed it, and put a bullet in his brain, and on January 1st, 2012, the new Siliao would be distributed and thus would begin the darkest years of humanity’s history. 

Throughout 2012, the CCP leadership would go through a record number of suicides as the party leaders could not live with themselves. Everything they had done, from betraying Mao in 1971, becoming a capitalist puppet state in the 70s and 80s, invading their neighbors and committing war crimes in Taiwan, couping Chen… and all for what? What was the point of it all? What had they gained? The country was literally eating itself to stay alive. This wasn’t life. The forced miscarriages were a mercy at this point. 

The Seventh Chairman also killed himself upon learning what Siliao was truly made out of, and the Eighth Chairman, a veteran of the Vietnam War, saw the pain in his people. It was then when he authorized 正义仁慈计划, or “Project Righteous Mercy”, the development of a biological weapon that would turn his people sterile. He was killed in late 2013, and the Ninth Chairman said there was still hope. That if the glorious People’s Liberation Army was to liberate Australia, they could build the true China. 

Australia, however, had seen the impending climate catastrophe coming all the way back in the 60s, and had prepared themselves better than any other country. Their fleet, long since having switched to nuclear, saw the Chinese attack force from miles away. It is said that the entire PLA Navy fleet is still at the bottom of the ocean, 50 miles from Sydney, Australia. 

After the Ninth Chairman was killed in a coup, each one of his successors would try to galvanize the country to conquer another one, each one failing more and more horribly than the last. In 2015, for the first time ever, China had seen a net decrease in population. 2.9 Billion isn’t a whole lot less than 3 Billion but it was progress. 

When the Truth got out on May 26th, 2019, that Siliao was made from human remains, the population was so jaded, so numb, that most simply didn’t care. A few chose to kill themselves, a few even volunteered to feed their children, but most were so malnourished that they had given up long ago. The CCP quickly assured the population that it was only made out of criminals and counter-revolutionaries, as if that made it any less morbid.

In 2022, it was the 12th Chairman who decided that Project Righteous Mercy didn’t go far enough. The dead had been recycled and consumed so many times now that people were now dying from mineral deficiencies. The only mercy they could receive would be death. However, it must still be merciful, painless, without suffering, for this world had enough suffering as it was. 天堂之眼计划, or “Project Eyes of Heaven”, as it was called, was to be made with great care to ensure that the mass euthanasia would be as quiet and painless as possible. 

As of 2023, Project Eyes of Heaven is still under way. Of the many SIZ China built, only two SIZ are still operating and 23 Megafactories still functioning. And what are they making? China’s final attempt at keeping its national identity. With its fleet lying on the sea bed near Australia, China’s last, best attempt at staying a nation is the invasion of their northern neighbor. The USSR has been extremely hostile towards China, creating a militarized border wall in 2007 and shooting anyone who tried to cross, no questions asked, over a kilometer from the wall. It was only through the swarming of 2.5 billion desperate, starving Chinese could they maybe reclaim their national spirit. Full-on collapse is imminent: many of the surviving nations believe China is partly to blame for the collapse of civilization, for tempting the world with their devilishly cheap goods. Already, parts of the PLA have rebelled and started executing civilians for just existing, mainly in Taiwan. China must make one last desperate push north or risk total collapse. 

[1]  By 2023, People’s Food would own over a third of China’s land. Land that had long lost its agricultural value. 
[2]  The Democrats would use this as a talking point during their 1988 campaign.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Gl5WsXinI4 

Section 2: The Red Army Marches

China expanded its sphere of influence throughout the 1970s and 1980s, and in the 1990s, invaded their neighbors. In the 2000s, pointless wars of attrition were fought for the sole purpose of getting soldiers killed and freeing up resources. 

Mongolia

Mongolia remained closely allied to the USSR. Because the USSR was very anti-Chen until the late 80s, this caused tension with China over its refusal to industrialize. In 1989, Batmönkh stayed in power due to the Crash, and then in 1990, Mongolia tried to formally join the USSR as a republic. The USSR seriously considers letting them join, however they ultimately side against it as they don’t want to risk a war with China at this point, as Soviet troops were withdrawn in 1990 to deal with an uprising in the Balkans. The Invasion is portrayed as bringing Inner Mongolia back into the fold of China. The USSR is against this idea, and while they cannot directly intervene to defend Mongolia in the invasion, they do give aid to the Mongolian rebels. Mongolian rebels are being trained by the USSR to distract and bog down the PLA. 


Two soldiers, one Soviet and one Mongolian, standing in front of an anti-Chinese propaganda poster. Taken sometime in the 1980s. 

Two SIZ are made in Mongolia in the 90s. As the climate warms up, several party leaders make “summer homes” in the cooler climate of Mongolia. As the years progress, they spend more and more time there. Eventually a city is built that is solely for high-ranking administrators, turning into the unofficial capital of China after the unimaginable pollution of Beijing and the explosion of the supercollider. This city is referred to as “New Beijing”. Political dissents are sent across the border where they are executed by Soviet snipers. After 2012, however, they are turned into Siliao. Of the areas China has conquered, Mongolia has the best land for agriculture, as it has a similar climate to Canada and Siberia. By 2023, most of the CCP are operating out of bunkers on the Chinese/Mongolia border. 

Thailand

Thailand is a bit more vengeful about the land it lost in 1946. The 1973 democracy movement succeeds, and is resolved peacefully due to Nixon negotiating it. The new democratic government sought to eliminate the problems plaguing pre-1973 Thailand, including rampant political corruption, curtailed freedoms and income inequality. A series of reforms are passed that incentivize social and economic change. These reforms did little to actually help the population, and instead they traded one corruption for another. Led by greed, politicians were known to be extremely corrupt and easily swayed by bribes. Something as simple as road construction would require at least one bribe in order to be done in an adequate quality. In the 80s Thailand was ruled by a small cadre of elite merchants and politicians who lived an extremely opulent lifestyle. Everytime the people demanded fairer wages, or better working conditions, or any kind of public service, the ruling class would accuse them of being communists and the activists in question would always disappear by totally-not-CIA operatives. 

During this time, the USSR covertly trained communist insurgents and supplied them with weapons. Then comes the Crash of 1988, and the population explodes in a violent revolt led by the Communists. In 1993, the Civil War ended with the Communists in power. They sign a pact of mutual defense with China after the Taiwan invasion, however China invades them a year later to “ensure the people are never betrayed again”. 

China built 2 SIZ in Thailand, both at politically unstable locations. These factories employ a large number of conveniently placed political prisoners. Throughout the Chinese occupation, Thai workers have demonstrated and rebelled on a similar level to the civil unrest in the USA. Notable uprisings have been suppressed in 1998, 2004, 2013 and 2019. By 2023, Thailand is another breadbasket to supply the dying China. The communists in power have more in common with the businessmen in the 70s and 80s than they’d like to admit. Much like the rest of Indochina, the humidity makes it very hard to work during the day and most farmers check their crops at night. 

Taiwan

Taiwan was extremely corrupt, with only fears of Mao and Chen to keep it together. So much so that the government is almost comically corrupt, to the point that people are executed on the street for being ”communist sympathizers”, when actually they didn’t sell someone a hot dog. After the PRC is recognized as the sole heir to China after the Shanghai Accords of 1972, Taiwan is ignored on the world stage until China formally invades them. Even then, most countries only send their condolences. Chiang Kai-Shek was assassinated by an agent of Chen in 1972, but it is never proven. Part of the Shanghai Accords also formally disbar any countries from investigating it. Martial Law was never lifted in 1987, as the KMT were suspicious of Chen’s administration. 

From 1972 to its invasion, Taiwan was an extremely paranoid police state that ruthlessly exploited its citizens. Chairman Chen is equally paranoid of Taiwan, which is why he is so harsh against its population.The worst mega-factories are built in Taiwan as a way to pollute and damage Taiwan’s environment to keep the Taiwanese weak and feeble. 5 SIZ are located here, with one of them designed to pollute the environment as efficiently as possible in a unique form of environmental warfare. 25% of the coal that China used until 2009 came from Taiwan, and rare luxury foods like sugar cane were grown until a fire destroyed most plantations in 2007. The PRC views Taiwanese as corrupted by Japan and subhuman, all the way until 2023. In 2023, with most of its resources extracted, China believes that Taiwan is more trouble than it’s worth and simply kills all of its residents to turn them into Siliao for the mainland. 

Cambodia

In the 1960s, Cambodia sided with South Vietnam in the Vietnam war. However, as the bloodthirsty US started bombing VietCong communists hiding in Cambodia and accidentally killing many Cambodians (Called the Blood Tide Massacre), they shifted more towards the communists. The Khmer Rouge was installed, however the Shanghai Accords secured their sovereignty. This meant that there could be no South Vietnam/US incursion into Cambodia. 

Due to the lucrative nature of the Shanghai Accords, the world turned a blind eye to the Cambodian Genocide. Many Cambodians were worked to death in intensive farming plantations to feed the laborers in the Chinese Megafactories. Cambodia didn't get invaded by Vietnam in 1978. Instead, North Vietnam pressures Pol Pot to be less evil against his workers. This led to a peaceful revolution that removed Pol Pot from power in 1979. The workers are treated a bit better (in the sense that dead workers can’t produce anything). 

Throughout the 80s, Cambodia went through a series of liberal reforms that granted its workers better working conditions, healthcare, and less hours, however they were still paid the same to keep the price of their products down. One SIZ is built here in the 80s. Full on peace and reconciliation efforts began in 1988 in Paris, however they were cut short by the Crash of 1988, and Cambodia descended into a civil war between the remnants of the Khmer Rouge and the pro-North Vietnam liberals. Later on, the exiled King and other factions join. As the civil war goes on, more and more land is destroyed. China played all sides, funding and training troops for both the Conservative and Liberal communists. Finally, in 1994, China invades Cambodia on the basis of “internal stability”. 

After China’s invasion, the remnants of the country are reformed into what is essentially a giant plantation, earning it the name “The Banana Republic of the East.” By 2023, Cambodia has been worked to the bone. Only very small amounts of food can be produced now, all of it extremely diseased. Humidity is so bad that people have to work during the night. 


Laos

In 1972, part of the Shanghai Accords, Laos was granted sovereignty from North Vietnam. Both sides of Laos would align with each other and in exchange, US Military forces were to leave it. In 1973-1976, a UN peacekeeping operation engaged in the de-armament of dropped US bombs. While the US withdrew from militarily aiding Laos, they would support them in other ways, such as a lucrative .95:.95 trade deal in textiles. This created a hopeful atmosphere and Suvannaphūmā did not die of a heart attack due to receiving a life-saving medical procedure in 1975. Because of this, however, the communist forces in Laos remain, just underground. They are secretly funded by the USSR. 

Lots of US companies come to Laos to run plantations. There are even reports of corporate espionage between US and China-based companies, using Laos as a battleground. Because of its proximity to other “communist” countries, Laos became a center for western missionary groups. Throughout the 80s there are a series of hostage crises as Christian Missionaries are captured by communist rebels. As Laos became richer, the wealth gap increased dramatically. By the late 80s, the communist forces gained more sympathy. 

After the Crash of 1988, the communist party launched another attack on the government, supported by the USSR, and later in 1990, China. Because the majority of the population were farmers, they managed to survive the initial crash relatively smoothly. But because of this, China invaded them in 1991. By 2023, Laos remains a glorified plantation for China, much like Cambodia, however the food they grow is much healthier due to the lack of ground pollution. Now if only the food didn’t rot in the humidity before reaching the peasantry in mainland China… 

Vietnam

The Vietnam War continued as normal until 1972 where a gradual detente would cause the war to end in 1975. South Korea and other South-East Asian nations send more troops, along with higher morale from US troops, causing the war to continue into a stalemate much like the Korean War instead of a total loss. A group of Maoist loyalists escaped to North Vietnam in 1973, which caused the US to renew and revitalize their war efforts. The Nixon administration claims it is the last remnant of “true communism” and is determined to stamp it out, afterwards they can worry about fixing the Soviet Union. 


Richard Nixon rallies US troops for a renewed defence of Hanoi, photographed 1974

This new system of Two Vietnams were both heavily supported by China, but only after the Maoist insurgency ended. China builds one SIZ in each Vietnam and then opens up a port deal. Vietnam is touted as a “communist to capitalist” success story by the USA and China, though in China they refer to it as “capitalism with Chinese characteristics”. Because of the enormous success of Chenism in Vietnam, many more SIZs are built in both Vietnams. North Vietnam ends up with 7, while South Vietnam ends up with 4. Throughout the 80s, the two Vietnams are referred to as Little China, and as they work together to utilize their industrial capacity, they enter negotiations to reunify. On April 4th, 1987, Vietnam formally reunited in a ceremony overseen by President King, Former President Nixon, and Chairman Chen. 

Because Vietnam was so closely modeled on China, they were hit particularly hard in 1988. Overnight, their industry dried up and was replaced by a lackluster agricultural system in the south. In 1989, a civil war began once again between the North and the South, except this time it was about the distribution of arable land. 

This was a wake up call to China, who saw their future in Vietnam if they didn’t keep their factories running and people employed. They would need resources, and that is where the plan to revitalize Africa came in. 

As the Civil War progressed, the hardcore Maoist faction re-emerged which caused Chairman Chen to launch an invasion. Vietnam then suffered much like Taiwan, turning into a police state, and the little arable land it had was exploited until the rising sea took over 90% of its land. By 2023, Vietnam is as thin as Chile and has no agricultural value to China. Its Venice-style port towns are used to ship crops from Indochina to the rest of China. 

Myanmar

In 1973, China began trying to suggest Myanmar implement Chenist reforms to their path to Burmese Socialism. Unlike a lot of the other countries in Indochina, they ended up resisting the lure of Chenism. This caused much of Myanmar’s history to go more or less uneventfully. The leader of Myanmar, known as the General, ruled Myanmar all the way up to 1990, where he was killed by a group of angry peasants who felt that he wasn’t going far enough to help them during the Red Decades. After this, the army took over Myanmar and ruled it with an iron first for 6 years, rigorously exploiting the land with intensive farming. Unlike the other countries in Indochina, the war with Myanmar wasn’t strictly about resources but about distracting their population from the starvation, poverty and industrial pollution that was starting to plague China. The fact that Myanmar had some agricultural value was simply a bonus. 

(North) Korea

North Korea remained just as isolated as it always was. After the 1971 Coup, they form closer ties to the USSR. This means that North Korea never became Chenist. After the Crash of 1988, and seeing how weak the US’s response to USSR’s invasions of Iran and Afganistan, Kim Il-Sung launched an invasion into South Korea. In 1992, after Kim Il-Sung’s death, his successor was much weaker, and because of that, the KPA led a coup on November 13th, 1997. This new dictatorship gets support from China in exchange for North Korea’s vast supplies of natural gas and coal. China set up environmentally devastating mining operations in the 90s to access these resources, tearing up huge amounts of the countryside for access to rare minerals and coal. This caused huge famines throughout the early 2000s, but despite this, North Korea is still barely capable of agriculture. In 2023, North Korea is the closest thing to China at the height of Chenism in 1987. Its industry remains fully functional, with the worst air pollution in the world as of January 1, 2024. Three SIZ are located here, and as of 2023, all fully functioning factories are located here. During the Great Death, North Korea is bombarded with nukes by the USSR - an ironic end considering how they chose their northern neighbor over their western one.

(South) Korea

South Korea is extremely anti-communist and anti-Japan. So anti-Japan, in fact, that placing tariffs on Japanese products were some of the first laws passed by the government after the Korean War, all the way back in 1953. South Korean police squads would regularly patrol the streets to execute suspected “communists” with the full support of J. Edgar Hoover and Joseph McCarthy. This rabid anti-communist mentality caused many more people to enlist in the army to fight in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War, contributing to the Vietnam Stalemate of 1972. Presidential elections have been rigged by the CIA since 1948. Because of this, there was no reform in 1960 and Rhee was kept as president until his death in 1971. Trade unions were also outlawed in 1964. South Korea’s first Five Year Economic Plan, based on massive amounts of exports to industrialize the nation, is actually what inspired Chairman Chen to have a similar plan, just on an absolutely colossal scale. Education and industrialization was encouraged, as it was thought that an educated worker could bring the country out of its agrarian age.  Because of its staunch anti-communist views, it received extra support from the US until 1972 when the US became very lax with China. This was seen as a massive betrayal by South Korea and was the start of their anti-US sentiment. In 1974, a large rebellion broke out as the populace no longer views the Communist world as a threat. Nixon heads to Seoul to help negotiate and reaches an agreement to help protect South Korea from the North, in exchange for 1:1 trade deals on everything. The CIA would also help keep the new President in power. Lots of the extremely environmentally damaging chemicals used in the mass production of consumer goods were developed in South Korea in the 1970s. 

South Korea opposed Chenism: at first. But like Japan, they would give in during the 1980s and would have many factories set up in China to produce their products. In fact, in mainland China, an entire SIZ is dedicated just to South Korean products. In the 1980s, after South Korea negotiated with China on the building of several megafactories, there were widespread protests as the Korean people had felt they had been betrayed by the government. This led to martial law being declared on December 12th, 1980. The rest of the government of South Korea, all coincidently shareholders of the biggest corporations of Korea, did not impeach the president for this sudden change of heart. They did not even reprimand him when he lifted tariffs on Japanese products and entered trade negotiations with them. In 1983, South Korea and North Korea entered talks about re-unifying, entering a short-lived trading agreement where the North would give the South coal and the South would give the North farming equipment. The Crash of 1988 renewed fears of communism and the talks ceased. 

After the Crash and the US withdrawing support, the government doubled down on their authoritarian regime. Tariffs on Japanese products were reintroduced. Due to the price of transportation, trade with China dried up, and the current administration enacted policies to try to rebuild South Korea’s industry. None of this would have any effect, as South Korea fell to civil war and invasion by the North later that year. After the Chinese annexation, South Korea is still ruled by vengeful North Koreans. It is the second worst place in China after Taiwan (which says a lot). South Korea has a lot of mineral resources, which China uses for the production of weaponry. About half of South Korea’s arable land is damaged by the pollution. Only one SIZ is built here. By 2023, most male South Koreans have been worked to death by their resentful North Korean masters. In China most concubines are South Korean. 

India

China’s war with India was the first war that was solely for causing its soldiers to die. India’s huge population caused it to fracture into civil war in the late 90s, which caused large parts of the country to descend into anarchy and warlordism. The parts of the country that remained under control by the government, mainly centered along the Ganges river and the coast, were at constant odds with Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Pakistan over fishing rights. Bangladesh was annexed by India in 1999, and Sri Lanka the year after. In 2001, the Pakistani Navy torpedoed a civilian Indian fishing boat and claimed that it was a spy vessel. This escalated into full-blown conventional war, with Pakistani troops burning wheat fields and killing cows. India’s dictator, driven over the edge at the news of his family being burned alive in his mansion, flipped the switch and nuked Pakistan. Pakistan nuked them back, and while India was able to destroy a vast majority of the nukes in the initial strikes, the river Ganges was permanently tainted with radioactive particles. 

After the disappearance of an entire fleet of Chinese vessels in 2007 (suspected to be a result of Indian pirates), China invaded India and removed the aging dictator from power. India was plunged into absolute anarchy after that, with a small series of independent communities lining the coast and clustered in Sri Lanka. As the pollution and radioactivity caused more and more land to become unusable, more and more cancer cases, and more and more deaths from radiation poisoning, there was almost nothing that remained. China plundered what little resources India had left, then began sending soldiers out on deliberate suicide missions into the radioactive wasteland of India, Pakistan, and Bangledesh. The Fourth Chairman came up with the idea of using the remaining city-states as target practice for military exercises, and the survivors of the Indian-Pakistani war were routinely subject to war crimes that would make the Taiwanese jealous. 

In 2014, an unexpected fleet arrived: the US military, waving the Food, Inc flag. The Food, Inc, looking for materials to keep their factories running, had come to pick over the radioactive slag heap that was once India. They made a lucrative deal with the Indians: precious metals in exchange for their new revolutionary product. The higher ups of Food, Inc had long suspected what the true ingredient of Siliao was, and always looking to cut costs, had decided to test out the efficiency of using recycled human corpses as a filler. And India was where Ration Omega was originally tested. China had considered engaging in war with Food, Inc, as it would be a surefire way to get rid of a couple million surplus Chinese, however there was no telling if the USA still had functional nuclear weapons. A nuclear war would for sure reduce the population significantly, but this was still seen as too extreme at this point. The 10th Chairman felt that China could still survive if she held on just a little longer. 

Japan

The war with Japan was officially about fishing rights. Some in the PLA had even claimed it was revenge for WW2. Under the Fourth Chairman, China sent waves after waves of Chinese soldiers across the sea to die in the Japanese Islands. Japan was a very stubborn country - they were starving, but very slowly and politely. Many elders had voluntarily followed the Emperor’s example and had committed mass suicide in 2006 to free up resources for the younger generations, however with this sacrifice came a massive loss of knowledge. Japan was falling apart at the seams, with industrial accidents happening before the overworked and under-educated Steward Society could stop them. And this was on top of the almost incomprehensible pollution that occurred before the Crash of 1988: over a half of people under 25 had lost eyesight in one or both of their eyes from cataracts forming. 

But again, Japan was stubborn. Wave after wave of Chinese invaders crashed upon their shores, and many sacrificed themselves for the good of their countrymen. Japan had been slow to re-arm itself, so many defenders were left to fight hand-to-hand or with WW2-era officer swords. Japan developed a special martial art for fighting in the trenches: Tōtoki unagi no michi, or “The Way of the Honorable Eel”. These soldiers were treated with the utmost reverence by their fellow citizens, and were given special privileges regarding their calorie rations. As Japan began rearming itself, however, the Chinese began being pushed further back until finally being pushed out of the home islands by 2009. Throughout 2010, Chinese warships only managed to make three landings, the rest of the vessels were sunk at sea. In 2011, after Japan was hit by a devastating earthquake that ruined much of the fragile metropolitan landscape, the CCP considered a proper invasion, however that would defeat the entire purpose of the phoney war: to reduce China’s population and maintain their economy making war material. 

Australia

Australia was uniquely prepared for the gradual end of civilization. While other countries like Iceland, New Zealand, Canada, the Nordic Union and the USSR were hit the softest because of their low populations, small population densities and cool climates, Australia had been dealing with wildfires, droughts and desertification long before it was impacting the rest of the world. Australia had always been regarded as “that funny land down under”, as they were reluctant to trade with China after the advent of Chenism. They were also the only country to legalize birth control on a massive scale in 1975, and also the only major country to outlaw Chlorofluorocarbons during the 80s. After extensive research into the causes of the Three Mile Island disaster, they were also the only country to not outright ban nuclear power. 

When the Crash of 1988 came around, Australia was unfazed, aside from completely banning immigration. 

Throughout the Red Decades, Australia had developed a healthy trading relationship with New Zealand, and thus only suffered from a permanent recession rather than a full on depression. The government enacted a policy of completely abandoning the countryside for complete urbanization, much like the USA, however Australia did it in a much more deliberate and controlled manner. Internal migrants would only be allowed into the cities if there was space for them. As more and more citizens were displaced, massive 40-story tall apartment buildings, colloquially known as “Hawke-Blocs[1]”, were built. 

Years of wildfire and drought had forced Australian cities to have uniquely open and spacious designs using fire-retardant materials to reduce the risk of fires. They weren’t foolproof, however - Darwin was completely burnt to a crisp during the Great Fire of 2005. Irrigation was also integrated into cities to create “districts” from which water could be drawn from to create barriers against active fires. People’s lawns were turned into community gardens much like the wartime victory gardens of WW2. And slowly, wind and solar power was implemented into the cities. 


An Australian Hawke-Class Nuclear Dreadnaught being repaired and refueled at a Sydney drydock. Photo taken in 2014, immediately after the sinking of the PLA fleet.

As more and more of the Outback was overtaken by climate change, more and more citizens were internally displaced and by 2010, much of the country was abandoned. Australia had been concentrated into 15 “mega cities”, each one with about 3 million citizens. With so much of the population in such a small area, the government was worried they might be vulnerable to attack. The Australian Navy was one of the most efficient in the world (second only to the USSR’s), having adopted nuclear engines around the early 1990s. While initially small, they escorted merchant vessels to and from Perth and New Zealand. After a hostage situation of an Australian merchant in 2003 off the coast of Wellington, however, both the New Zealand and Australian governments adopted a “shoot first, ask questions later” policy. In 2010, the Australian Navy was massively increased and began routine patrols around the coast of Australia, with New Zealand following suit in 2011. 

It was then no surprise when the entire Chinese Navy was sunken off the coast of Sydney on April 4th, 2014. Both Australia and New Zealand’s militaries had been on high alert due to the increasing number of refugees fleeing from the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia. New Zealand’s Navy had been patrolling on the opposite side of New Zealand at the time, so Australia was alone. It was not a problem, however - the fleet of 150 dreadnaughts, staffed by 15,000 well-fed, well-educated and well-disciplined Australian sailors decimated the entire PLA Navy over the course of four hours. By the time that New Zealand reinforcements arrived, the battle was already over. 13 ships were lost on the Australian side, and it is because of that number that the Australians fought with such ferocity. There was no more room on the ship, so to speak, and Australia had long kept a policy of taking no prisoners. 

China

And so, with no options left, China turned inwards on itself. 

China had been struggling for almost two decades to keep its people fed and factories running, lest they risk total revolt, and that is exactly what ended up happening. In 2019, a factory in occupied Myanmar was burned down in an open declaration of war from the long-thought dead Maoist faction of the CCP. This was followed by waves of starving farmers taking up arms in Indochina and burning crop fields. 

The PLA, fractured and humiliated, was called in to regain order. However, more than half of the soldiers ended up defecting and joining the rebel faction. As the Maoist anarchy spread through Southeastern Asia, the terrible truth was revealed: Siliao was PEOPLE!!!!!!!! 

It took a while for the world to spread, but soon entire army divisions rose up in open rebellion. They were the only people in China who were properly fed, and thus had the energy to actually rebel. Even then, the rebel factions were outnumbered almost 5 to 1, and after a few weeks, the CCP was once again under control of the country. A statement was made that Siliao was only made from the flesh of subversives, that no hard working son of Chen was being recycled, but at this point, no one cared. 

[1] Named after the Prime Minister of Australia from 1983-1997, Bob Hawke.
Part 2-2
A Fractured World: A European Tragedy
Section 1: Freedom or Security

Excerpt from "Encyclopedia Europa: Europe before the Black Ages” by Cormac Eisenwald, Man from Mullingar Press, 919 ASJ


The historic Brussels meeting in 1993 where the European Federation was announced.

The early 90s hit Europe hard. Intense rationing began following the total devastation of the food supply in the Hot Summer. Europe’s energy grid was crumbling to the rapid rise of temperatures and ever more intense heatwaves. The fastest warming continent in the world was struggling to adapt to the rapid and constant change, and with their economies in continuous decline, the nations knew they would struggle to survive against the other superpowers if they went alone.

And so, on June 7th, 1993, the Brussels Conference ended with a historic announcement - the willing countries of the European Union would band together to form the European Federation the following year. The countries were as follows: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, (West) Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. The United Kingdom, Ireland, and Greece refused, mainly on the grounds of sovereignty and/or public backlash.

The new European Federation allowed its member states a fair degree of autonomy - they each had their own parliaments, premiers, control of education, healthcare, and taxation, among others. The Federal Government itself had more control over energy and immigration policy - immigration was for obvious reasons, but energy was decided upon to coordinate building efforts better and for projects to not get bogged down in the maze of local governance. It was a model similar to the federalism of the United States of America, if not slightly more centralised.

The model worked okay at first - it helped to somewhat appease the many nationalists opposing the federalisation. However, in this rapidly and unstoppably dying world, this model would very soon come across large issues. Most of the time, the state governments would elect left-wing ones amicable to the governing Party of European Socialists and with aligned policies, creating little conflict with the federal government. However, the dominant PES (or PSE, SPE, whatever the language) began to face significant challenges in the late 90s in the face of the far-right, or the rapidly growing National European Front. The far-right had already been causing mass social unrest in the cities of Europe as a result of the mass influx of immigrants from the desertifying Africa and radioactive Middle East. These concerns didn’t have as much of an impact on the electorate as the far-right would like to have believed, but as the 90s rolled on and the economic situation got ever worse, mass radicalisation occurred and thousands upon thousands of people joined extremist paramilitaries, such as the infamous Famille de Liberté in France, Bündnis für Heimat Deutschland (BHD) in Germany, and the Esercito del Popolo in Italy. The terrorism spawned by them wreaked havoc among Europe’s cities for years until their crackdown in the 2000s. They found their political wing in the NEF, which the PES tried to attack them with, to no avail.

The NEF continued to do better and better in state and federal elections, replacing the EPP as the dominant right-wing party. In 1998 Italy narrowly elected an NEF premier following massive locust swarms and increasing waves of anti-migrant sentiment. The new premier repeatedly clashed with the federal government, most notably on immigration where they directed the local military and EP branches to sink migrant boats and conduct mass deportations of “illegal migrants”, which ended up being considered anyone who looked non-European. The federal government was enraged and the federal Supreme Court ruled against it, threatening to replace the premier and hold new elections. The Italian premier backed down but continued to challenge federal policy, including by reintroducing the death penalty and criminalising homosexuality. This galvanised the NEF, and their unstoppable growth in local and state parliaments, as well as an overperformance in the 1999 federal election, scared the PES shitless and worried figures of a possible NEF government, which the PES was desperate to avoid. In 2000, following the takeover of the Netherlands and Portugal's’ parliaments by the NEF and brutal race riots in Marseilles and Barcelona, the Federation introduced two new laws - the Migration and Border Control Act, which suspended the admission of refugees indefinitely, and the National Security Act [1], which banned most far-right and far-left paramilitaries completely, labelled them as terror groups, and mandated excessive jail time for membership of one. This threatened to once again galvanise the NEF and the PES decided to finally take drastic action. On the 14th March 2001, a large NEF march was taking place in Brussels outside the European Parliament. A few gunshots and conveniently placed counter-protestors was all it took for the rally to get out of control and for the NEF to be banned a few days later under an emergency act.


The aftermath of the bombing of Bologna Central railway station as part of the 1997 Bologna attacks [2], the deadliest terrorist attack in the 90s. The far-right Esercito del Popolo group claimed responsibility for the attack soon after.

The NEF and far-right weren’t the only extremists active on federal Europe’s streets. The European Communists and Left (ECL) were a far-left party mainly consisting of communists and radical leftists, coming to prominence following the election of a Communist president in France in 1989. The far-left had its own paramilitaries and terror groups, such as Spain’s Frente de Acción Obrera (FAO) and the revival of Italy’s Red Brigades. Due to having more initial electoral and policy success they weren’t as prominent as their far-right counterparts, yet in response to the increasing authoritarianism of the PES they began to take more direct action. Bombings of government buildings and assassinations, such as the 1999 Seville bombing in which the FAO killed a Spanish MFP and two MSPs in one go [3], were getting more and more commonplace. These had the effect of drawing more attention to the far-left as was being drawn to the far-right, unfortunately for them most of it was negative. The National Security Act banned far-left paramilitaries as well as far-right ones, and relations quickly soured between the ECL and other parties due to their refusal to condemn the terror attacks. The ECL were the next party in the PES’s sights and would not get away lightly.

The far-left were rapidly gaining more support as former NEF voters voted for them as a protest vote against the PES establishment. They had two key assets on their side that the NEF didn’t. One was the presence of a stable support base among the working class and industrial workers, and the other was the power of the trade unions. The majority supported the PES in the 90s, whose governments relaxed labour laws and supported strikers in disputes. However, they became disillusioned and fearful of them over time, looking at their growing authoritarianism with worry and seeing big corporations gain more and more influence. The more radical ECL seemed like an increasingly viable alternative and as their endorsements shifted their methods shifted alongside. Strikes became larger and longer, attacks became more frequent, and the government and unions were coming to a head. The trade unions had the power to collapse the Federation itself and the government did not like that.

You may ask, what was influencing the growing authoritarianism and anti-unionism of the PES? Unsurprisingly, the culprit was the new foodstuffs industry, more specifically the growing megacorporation of FulTec.


The logo of FulTec’s German branch in the 90s. The slogan for other branches was in their respective languages. Note that FulTec became the official name in 1994, so the full name is not included.

FulTec (Funktionelle Technologien until 1994) was established in 1983 as firstly an R&D company based in Frankfurt, West Germany by businessman and engineer Dietmar Voss, who had spotted out automation as a key field that had great potential in the years to come with the decline of Germany’s manufacturing sector and the rise of the service economy. They ended up mainly working on home automation, designing systems for automating heating, lighting, and ventilation in homes and flats. The products were very successful due to their low costs (from making them from parts imported from China) and homeowners and landlords invested large amounts in them. Profits and stock values were reaching record highs, and the company was swiftly expanding and rising over its competitors.

The 1988 crash wiped out practically all their gains as consumer spending and demand collapsed, and China’s move towards protectionism in the 90s dealt a crippling blow to their profits. FulTec did not move on that quickly, as there was still a market to be made in energy efficiency appliances. As the effects of climate change began to be felt and bills skyrocketed ever higher, there was new demand for them from the struggling middle class to save up on costs. However, German manufacturing was slow to restart and importing parts was extraordinarily expensive, meaning their appliances were often too pricey for ordinary consumers to afford. Only the upper class would buy their products, but their number shrunk as the class divide ever widened, and FulTec struggled to turn a profit. Net loss after net loss sent them into dire straits and they seemed to be about to close down in 1992, when Voss stepped down and a new businessman, Klaus Riedel, became the CEO. Riedel had been working in FulTec since 1986 and rose rapidly up the ranks in those few years. He unsuccessfully warned them about the imminent economic depression when the Sinai War began escalating and had been in touch with many prominent climate scientists throughout the years, expressing deep concern over its possible impacts, mainly on the food supply. He was one of the first people to take note of the food crisis, and spying developments in America and China, quickly took to reinventing the company entirely, basing it entirely on foodstuffs and manufacturing. The move was incredibly risky and changing course was difficult and costly, but being the first to take initiative led to FulTec rising above and outproducing their competitors and becoming the dominant food supplier in Western Europe.

FulTec’s rapid expansion, however, soon faced challenges under the Federation’s new anti-monopoly laws introduced in 1995 by the federal government. They soon faced lawsuits and were threatened to either downsize or be split up into smaller companies. Riedel was strongly against this, believing too much competition would lead to inefficiency and higher food prices, and launched a large lobbying campaign to remove the laws. Conveniently enough, large amounts of the government were also against this, and with FulTec’s growing influence in the government, and its vast amounts of cash, the anti-monopoly laws were repealed just four years after their inception in 1999. With help from the government, FulTec was able to crush all its remaining competitors and became the Federation’s only food supplier by 2002.

FulTec, like other foodstuffs corporations in the world, gained immense amounts of money and power, and increasing influence in the federal and state governments. They would pay millions or billions of euros to create or repeal laws to their benefit and had “advisors” planted in governments to influence policy. The main in which FulTec would influence the government was their political wing (in all but name) - the Third Wave grouping in the PES. Born in 1997 from an Austrian MFP, they pushed for the PES to shift to the right and take a more authoritarian stance on the extremists and terrorists to “ensure the stability of Europe”. The movement gained more and more successes - in 1998 they prevented the NEF from taking Austria’s state parliament, and in 1999 got five of their members into the new cabinet. They elected more and more premiers and took control of more and more branches, and by 2002 they became the dominant wing of the PES and dictated most of their policy.

The far-right was split on FulTec’s rise - some believed FulTec was necessary to solve the food crisis and believed “illegal migrants” should be taken to work in their factories. Others believed they were a threat and a danger to them and should be nationalised or broken up before they became too powerful. Most were paid off by FulTec anyway, and the megacorp were strong opponents of the NEF, believing the far-right terrorism to be a threat to their stability, and supporting the NSA’s passing. The far-left was unanimously angered by these developments and vowed to fight viciously against them and the reformed PES. One of the biggest opponents of FulTec was the trade unions - those “pesky bugs” fighting for better workers rights and the dismantlement of the megacorp. The PES government and the Third Wave faction was also opposed to the far-left, and with more and more anti-union laws introduced locally and with strikes growing more and more numerous, a showdown loomed between the government and the workers. The only question was “who would strike first”.

And then the summer of 2003 arrived, and all hell broke loose.


Mass protests in Paris during the General Strike of 2003. Photograph taken in August that year.

The summer of 2003 was the hottest and deadliest summer ever recorded in Europe at the time, producing record-breaking temperatures of 54°C in Córdoba and Seville and 53 degrees in Sicily. Up north, Paris reached a scorching 46 degrees and Brussels 44 in August, with London further up north reaching an unprecedented 45 in July. Catastrophe emerged, as despite the ever-rising temperatures, Europe’s cities, which were already facing bankruptcy and stripped for cash, were completely unprepared to deal with it. The lack of AC and heat insulation in buildings led to hundreds of thousands of extra deaths as masses of unemployed and homeless were cooked alive in their homes and on the streets. Hectares of forests burned and wildfire smoke choked cities to death with pollution. Electricity prices skyrocketed to unaffordable highs and the remaining city lights shut down.

The heatwave had an even more damaging effect on the food supply. As the continent cooked, farms and fisheries, mainly in the south, simply stopped functioning. Irrigation systems stopped working, plants weren’t growing and animals were being baked alive in the suffocating heat, promising the food crisis to escalate further. The water situation was even worse - megadroughts began in Iberia, Italy, and Southern France and rivers and aquifers dried up, creating a severe water shortage in lots of Europe. More strict water rationing measures were implemented, but in many areas the crises became too much to handle, triggering mass exodus out of Andalusia and Southern Italy. FulTec was being hit as a result, too, with its profits in the second and third quarter of 2003 falling by a total of 18%, sparking panic among its executives. They had sort of prepared for such an event, building lots of their new farms and factories up north, but the heatwave still had an unexpectedly heavy effect, and they were soon in a dire financial state, despite government subsidies. To mitigate this, they were forced to withdraw or reduce operations in foreign European countries such as Greece, Scandinavia, and the UK in August that year, which soon created seismic political shifts across the continent.

Even then, they struggled to turn a profit, and food was in short supply across the country. The heat, the mass deaths, and the food shortage led to first unrest, then riots and bombings in many cities. Food riots, which were relatively uncommon previously, became much more frequent in 2003, and mayhem erupted in many large cities, which became clouded with smoke from burning buildings. Groups which were previously suppressed by the NSA saw an opportunity to rise up again, and the daily terror attacks of the late 90s returned in hotter climates as the police were quickly overwhelmed by the growing anarchy. The Federation desperately tried to control the situation, but it was decaying much faster than expected, and some figures warned of possible near-term collapse.

And in the midst of all this, the trade unions saw the opportunity of a lifetime.

On the 17th July 2003, a meeting of the major trade unions in Paris and representatives from the ECL ended in an announcement of a general strike, with the federal leader of the ECL blasting the socialist government for “leaving the workers and poor of Europe for dead” and declaring that “the revolution will come in short order”. The vast majority of trade unions took part and offices and factories soon emptied out as production took a freefall. The alarm in the government rapidly turned into utter panic as projections showed the combined effect of the general strike, the heatwave and crime wave could shrink Europe’s economy by up to 20% at the worst in two years, leading to total state collapse. Members of the government cursed themselves for not suppressing the unions earlier. FulTec theoretically wouldn’t be affected by the strike as none of its workers were unionised, however that did not stop workers from joining protests and skipping work days. They quickly began to crack down, promising “severe repercussions” on participating workers, and using their private militias to hunt down workers not attending. Despite the boiling temperatures, giant union-organised protests covered the streets. Many took place in the mornings and evenings to avoid the lethal sunlight.

The government took action quickly. A few days after the strike’s inception and the leader of the ECL’s “revolution” speech, his party was banned due to “inciting violence” and “threatening the Federation’s stability”, going the same way as the NEF two years before. Police were deployed to protests and ordered to try to hold them back, though the sheer scale of them meant the struggle was futile. The increasing spending given to the police instead of other areas worried many that the Federation was turning into a police state like many other countries had been forced to become, the ECL using that prominently in their messaging. Legislation was drafted to curtail the power of unions, but it was seen as “too little too late”, and the momentum of the strike was still going strong. And in other areas of the Federation, things were quickly deteriorating.

The region of Andalusia in southern Spain had been suffering under climate change, experiencing a severe drought from 1997-2002. After rain finally fell, the people were optimistic that the worst was finally over, however the summer of 2003 quickly took all that away and an even worse drought struck the region, which would end up permanent. Desertification was rapidly taking over the area and as food and water shortages rose and living in the cities became unsustainable, a mass exodus began taking place. Anti-government sentiment, which had been building up for a while, swiftly took over the area, and the already strong regional FAO took to act on those fears. On the 29th of July 2003, militias were deployed in the city of Seville, and the ensuing “March on Seville” ended in an FAO takeover of the city, with many other similar events happening over the following weeks. The local FAO declared independence from the Federation, forming the “Ejército Español Libre (EEL)” which promised to march on Madrid and “free Spain from the capitalist occupiers”. Similar movements rose up in Portugal which was similarly affected by the drought and heat, though a rival march on Lisbon failed and the city was placed under martial law. The Federation immediately declared war against the rival government and sent multiple divisions there. However, with conditions there nearing inhospitable and with the abundance of other issues, opinion on the war quickly soured and led to a backlash against the government, with many people believing they would collapse on their own given enough time.

The far-right saw the unfolding events and, seeing the FAO’s successes, believed they could replicate them easily with the government at their weakest. On the 12th of August 2003, the local underground Esercito del Popolo branch in Naples marched on the city and took over the local government, with similar events occurring in neighbouring towns. The local EP also declared independence and formed the “Fronte di Liberazione Italiano (FLI)”, threatening to march on Rome like Mussolini did 80 years ago and create a far-right rival Italian government. However, already prepared by the similar events in Spain and informed by an insider, the Federation quickly caught the newborn FLI offguard and deployed the army to retake occupied towns and crush it before it was born, storming through Naples and declaring martial law three days later. A similar attempt was tried in Sicily a week after but only had limited success and was soon destroyed.

The government looked at these events with immense concern - they showed that people were angry and dissatisfied to overthrow them, and if carried out on a large scale, could very possibly succeed. The ECL leader’s warnings about a revolution did not seem too far off, and as August was close to an end, the general strike, the uprisings and the bombings were showing no sign of stopping. If this kept up, the Federation would fall apart. On the 19th of August 2003, a private meeting was conducted by members of the government, lasting for five hours straight. There was much speculation as to what was discussed, but two days later, the answer was revealed.

The government had resorted to truly drastic measures this time.

---

21/08/2003
11:31AM
ROME, ITALY, EURO. FEDERATION

It was yet another searing summer day in Rome, as the crowds filling the streets below were blanketed in an immense, suffocating heat. The air was filled with smog that the people of the Italy, hell, the whole world, had experienced and grown used to on a daily basis. It was getting so dire that even old structures such as the Colosseum were getting damaged and decayed from the pollution. But it wasn’t as if anyone was visiting or attending these places anyway, after tourism fell apart in the last decade. Umbrellas and hats were a common sight as people tried in vain to withstand the encroaching heat and radiation, though for many that was not an option. The folla morta had become martyrs from the people marching daily in Rome, Paris, Madrid, on every city’s streets.

The sun was rising ever higher in the sky, however that did not deter the hordes of men, women, children marching down the street, waving colourful banners, flags of all kinds.

“VENDICARE I MORTI”

“ROTTURA DI FULTEC”

“ABBASSO LA DITTATURA E IL FASCISMO”

“NON ABBIAMO NULLA DA PERDERE SE NON LE NOSTRE CATENE!”

Alessandro didn’t have a flag nor a banner. Some people were holding a giant flag of the CGIL union. Another was holding a flag of the ECL. One was even flying the flag of the USSR. Idiot, he thought looking at it. They’ll get you for sure.

On a normal day, heavily armed police and soldiers would surround the crowds of protestors, threatening them, taking people out and blocking their path many times. Today, most of them were conspicuously absent, with only a few bordering them. Alessandro thought it was unusual. But he continued marching like everyone else. Maybe they had finally decided to back down.

Alessandro was like many of these people. He was 36 years old, growing up during the opulent 70s and 80s and was part of what was commonly called the “Betrayed Generation”, who had been born in that time [4], promised futures of post-scarcity and luxury, only to have them being burned down in the flames of nuclear war and grown up to live in a world of poverty and heat. Alessandro had not gone to university, and instead started work after he left school in 1985 as an electrician. The company he worked for closed down in 1989 and in a stroke of fortune found a job at Italy’s state electrical company, which he kept until 1998 when the constant electrical grid failures forced them to downsize and lay many off, including Alessandro. He was quickly taken in by FulTec, where he worked long hours and in terrible conditions in a factory in Rome. The conditions there radicalised him and he took part in a riot in May 2003, which burned down that factory. Since then he was forced to live on Rome’s streets, hiding out from nearby policemen and being helped by his fellow unemployed and communists, joining the daily protests that manifested on the roads.

All these people had to lose was their chains. And they would not stop marching until they were broken.

The strikers continued to march on, moving further centre and taking a right onto the Via dei fori imperiali, right at the heart of the city, connecting some of the most famous landmarks around. Today’s rally was especially large - there was due to be a speaker, an MFP from the Italian ECL, who would do a speech on the street and march with them down to the railway station. Many looked forward to that. The rally continued downwards, shaking off the heat, sticking together as the sun ominously shone down on them.

The speaker was due to appear at this point. He seemed to have not arrived yet. A disturbance was brewing in the crowd.

The government meeting reported two days ago was stuck in Alessandro’s mind. He was unable to shake the feeling that something big was going to happen.

The march came to a halt. Alessandro saw a wall of soldiers blocking their way. The crowd held each other’s arms and tentatively marched forward, coming head to head with the wall. Tanks and a giant device were rolled out onto the pavement. Worry began to spread. His mind screamed at him to run away.

One of the soldiers raised his voice.

“L'esercito vi ha ordinato di disperdervi immediatamente o apriremo il fuoco.”

Open fire? Bullshit. They wouldn’t dare try that.

An unmeasurably loud, piercing, shrieking noise ripped through the air and tore open Alessandro’s ear. In his last moments of hearing he heard the unmistakable ripping sound of gunfire and growing screaming. As his hearing shut off he saw the crowd turning around and madly sprinting towards him as a giant tank accelerated  and soldiers marched towards them. Desperate not to get crushed by the crowd, thoughts utterly incoherent, he ran away, anywhere, rightwards, hoping to get into another street and maybe hide out in the alleys or a house so the army wouldn't kill him.

But it was too late, as another tank rolled out of that street and may or may not have fired a round at the crowd, as a shockwave knocked Alessandro off his feet, and an endless deluge of hands and feet crushed and crumpled and mangled his body like he was a toy, a plaything. Bones were crushed under the weight and force of the masses and his lungs were smashed and suffocated, he couldn’t breathe and as the crowd dispersed a few heavy lumps maybe bullets hit him and tore through his skin and bone. As his last breaths were taken he looked back, remembered those precious old times, those days going out with friends to watch a movie at a cinema, those days when food wasn’t just shitty paste and wasn’t so expensive, those days when the Earth was somewhat cool and not a perpetually searing humid oven, those days that had been taken away by the forces of capitalism as they scoured the Earth red with blood and painted it black with the dirt of coal.

Just why did it have to be this way?

---


Tanks on the move to suppress protests in Brussels during the Crackdown, 21st August 2003

Many atrocities were committed that day.

Taking notes from previous incidents in the Soviet Union and China, the European Army fired thousands of rounds at protest groups and strikers, brought tanks to shell groups of protestors, and even fired artillery in some cases to disperse the groups. The Army had been investing heavily in research for a while to prepare for a possible war against the Soviet Union, and one of their developments was a variant of the LRAD - the Long-Range Acoustic Device developed by the USA in the 90s. These were designed for not only conflict but possible protest/riot suppression, being deployed firstly in the 2003 Crackdown and in later protests as well. Tens of thousands of protestors were killed in the Crackdown - the initial number is uncertain but estimates from human rights groups and the Council ranged from 10,000 to 70,000 at the very worst. Many died from the usage of bullets and the soldiers opening fire, some also died from tanks firing into crowds, but the vast majority died from crowd crushes, as the one major thing that the previous methods were designed to do was to spawn fear. And fear did they spawn. The internal response to the suppressions were varied - some rallies fled at the opening shots. Others tried to resist, and one crowd in Barcelona was able to overpower the deployed army and occupy the tanks, trying to ram them into the Barcelona local government building. They were later surrounded and massacred by a larger army deployment inside that building.

The world was shocked by the events occurring, no one expected Europe of all places to resort to this brutality and inhumanity, yet they did. The world had already been sliding towards authoritarianism, with China and the USSR becoming ever more totalitarian and the US slowly moving towards a dominant-party state, and it was evident that Europe was following the path of them, however with its democratic and progressive post-war history the sheer openness of the incident surprised many. The Alliance of Nations harshly condemned it, alongside the remaining human rights groups, but what were they to do to such a large nation? Europe claimed in its official statement regarding it to the AoN, “...despite what has unfolded may seem and perhaps is inhumane and vicious... ...had we not done this the death toll of the inevitable collapse of the Federation and civil war would have been far greater. We are only trying to protect our nation and have done what is necessary for our stability...”. The other superpowers didn’t necessarily react negatively, though. China and the Soviets had already been doing that for a while (in fact the Crackdown was likely inspired by this) and the USA was already passing harsher anti-crime laws, perhaps looking to Europe for ideas for if unrest got so large. The only major nations that displayed outrage were the Nordic Union and the United Kingdom, however they had no power over Europe, and Britain seemed hypocritical itself.

The initial Crackdown might have been good in the short term for suppressing unrest but was far from a long-term solution for ending it, as renewed anger was already developing and summers were bound to get even hotter in the future. The Federation soon forcibly passed [5] a slew of new laws designed to increase control and prevent such events from ever happening again. One of them was the Freedom of Information Act of 2003, which firstly officially banned extremist or “terror-supporting” newspapers (what that was was up to the discretion of the government), which were exempt from the NSA but still heavily suppressed. The act also created the “News and Communication Agency”, which was where any new newspaper (not that many were being created) would have to be proposed to be allowed to form. The Agency also reviewed newspaper articles and issues to detect “governmental security breaches”, which was basically anything that criticised the government and incites resistance. A similar act was passed shortly afterwards concerning radio and television was already highly regulated and government-controlled.

So goes the freedom of press in Free Europe.

Another one was the European Stability Act of 2003, whose primary function was to merge the police and local army into the “Local Protection Units”. The role of the LPUs were mainly to suppress unrest and rebellion, and were far more militarised and had many more powers than the original police, such as requiring no warrant to enter property, being able to detain anyone at will (although in rare cases if it was deemed there was no reason for their detaining they could be fined), and being freely able to disperse large gatherings or harshly suppress protests. They were given enough power that over time they essentially acted as their own government-backed militia, with little advice or control from the government on their actions, becoming a giant money sink as equipment was lost and unrest grew throughout the years. The European Stability Act also criminalised protesting and reintroduced the death penalty federally for the most severe crimes. It was never legally mandated, but LPUs soon began to advise people to report others for expressing anti-government views. It is unknown as to whether the government suggested that themselves, but it is implied that officers were desperate to meet arrest quotas and created the advice so they could fulfil them easier. The act was later amended in 2004, with pressure by FulTec, to replace firstly the harshest punishments, but later all, with penal labour, sending prisoners to work long, hot, and cruel hours on the expanding superfarms of FulTec, allowing them to significantly boost their workforce and expand their profits, saving them from bankruptcy and collapse.

So goes the freedom of expression in Free Europe.

Another one was the Trade Union Act of 2003, which aimed to prevent a general strike of that scale from repeating itself. The act put all trade unions under government control and limited their maximum strike time to just one day. Unions could only be formed if 70% of local workers voted in a ballot, and if the same percentage voted to form one, and even then, if the government gave permission. The government attempted to keep a veneer of lenience to them by not outright destroying them and giving them permission to strike, but in practice they were neutered, being immensely hard to form and only being allowed to strike with permission. To avoid a collapse in membership, the government subsidised the formation of them and allowed them to dispute with employers, occasionally siding with the employees. But if these disputes hardly succeeded in the first place, then what was the point of their existence?

So goes the freedom to unionise in Free Europe.

The measures led to a mass outcry of fear and revulsion. Lots of the remaining opposition politicians that weren’t threatened or bought out cried out against the draconian measures, stopping short of calling for a resistance movement and pleading for the government to at least relax some of them. The remaining left-wing PES politicians resigned and left the party as “Democratic Independents”. The intensity of protests suddenly spiked as protestors and the remaining extremist groups desperately tried to fight back against the new laws before they were wiped out. However, the Crackdown had already heavily exhausted them and not nearly enough tried to fight back. Many of the PES politicians that left disappeared soon after, and the opposition suddenly found itself faced with an influx of newcomers and unknown challengers to old politicians' seats, and large amounts of money coming from nowhere. The LPUs were unleashed on the remaining protestors and extremists, quickly shutting down the remaining groups and driving many into irrelevance. It seemed like there was nothing people could do.

The only major and somewhat successful resistance was coming from the devolved governments. All of the state governments aside from Luxembourg (which was controlled by the liberal ALDE) were governed by the PES, of which most were aligned with the Third Wave and the federal government. However, a few were still from different factions and held on against other challengers, most notable being the premiers of Denmark and Portugal, who along with Luxembourg, soon declared their opposition to the measures and their intention to oppose their implementation. This was all easier said than done, as the federal government launched numerous court cases to forcefully enforce the laws (as they were federal after all). However, the opposing governments were able to use loopholes and tried creating new state laws to negate the effects of the federal ones, surviving challengers and elections off of sheer organic and popular support against waves of big money from FulTec. For instance, Denmark’s premier passed numerous disguised pro-union laws and passed the LPU Security Guarantee Act which created a large and complex bureaucracy system for the LPUs to fill out if they wanted a search or arrest warrant, essentially making them unable to get them due to the large costs. However, this ended up backfiring immensely as on the same day a court ruling declared it illegitimate an LPU division broke into the premier’s home, tortured and killed him, and hung him up from a lamppost in Copenhagen, the federal government brushing it under the rug and claiming he retired to “take a break from politics”. Portugal’s premier got off easier and some relaxations were temporarily allowed before he was defeated the following election, disappeared, and replaced by a FulTec executive. Luxembourg’s premier suffered a similar fate.

Members of the federal government were seeing this and soon came to realise that the federalised structure of the nation was unnecessary and hostile to the nation’s stability, whatever that meant now. Local government was becoming a hotbed for resistance and most were controlled by the PES and had similar laws anyway. In February of 2005 the government published a proposal titled “The Future of the European Federation’s devolved structure and the influence of the Federal Government”, which called for the government to rapidly centralise and take power away from local and state governments to “streamline bureaucracy” and “save costs”, though everyone knew they were just scared of resistance building up and Denmark happening again. The following year, the State and Local Governance Act of 2006 was passed and abolished local government beyond the states and transferred many functions such as healthcare, education and transport from the states to the federal government, making the states essentially ceremonial. With practically all state government and most local governments exhausted, corporate-controlled and unable to resist, the act passed without a hitch despite the vast changes. Despite keeping the name, the European Federation was no longer a Federation.


A common sight in the drying countryside and plains of what was formerly known as Spain. Photograph taken and enhanced sometime in the late 2000s.

Europe in 2006 was fundamentally changed from what it was a decade ago. Resistance and anti-government sentiment was effectively banned. The Party of European Socialists was dominant and without significant opposition, with only the FulTec backed Greens and the now-minor conservative EPP and liberal ALDE, who would merge into the Democratic Alliance in 2011, acting as major but suppressed opposition. The LPUs spread fear and betrayal in the streets, eating up billions and billions of euros yearly, and unions collapsed en masse due to overly restrictive laws. “Food” was quickly turning into just “stuff” as desertification advanced, the nation fragmented and FulTec struggled to recover from 2003. The nation’s spirit was broken and rotting, and the government, reading the latest AoN climate reports, hurriedly prepared for the worst.

And things were going to get much worse than anyone would expect.

[1] The Migration and Border Control Act was voted for by a majority of the PES and all the NEF and EPP who hoped to see it as a vindication of their goals. The NSA was introduced later than the MBCA (near the end of the year) and was voted for by all parties that were not the far-right and left.
[2] The Piazza Maggiore and University of Bologna were also targeted.
[3] MFP - Member of Federal Parliament
     MSP - Member of State Parliament
     The politicians were coming there for a meeting about the growing water and desertification crises in Southern Spain. The bombing caused mass public backlash and soured public opinion on the ECL and far-left, being named the “Bologna moment” of the ECL.
[4] The term is colloquial among lots of the people of the world, mainly among European and American youth. There are no specific birth years, but they are considered to be from mainly the 60s and 70s and 80s if you stretch it. They were the main voting bloc that brought the left-wing to power among the democratic world and are more politically active and vote much more extreme than the average.
[5] After the banning of the NEF and ECL the PES had a narrow overall majority in Parliament. However, it still had some MFPs opposed to these new laws and so threatened and bribed as many of the other parties as possible to vote for them too.

Section 2: When God Stumbles

Excerpt from “The Long Reach of Brussels: European War in the 21st Century”, by Marek Eisenwik, Oslo Press, 946 ASJ

https://youtu.be/z82ooN-NaKQ?si=qiQsB7OKcVDUbd1o 

Introduction: The Fall of West Berlin and the End of the Cold War


The skyline of Berlin in 2000, suffocated by constant air pollution from nearby factories and wildfires. The Soviets placed many factories near the city’s border to increase pollution and ferment unrest in the city.

It was half past eleven at night in the city of West Berlin, on the 1st of August 2003. News of the general strike had spread here to the isolated enclave and many workers were skipping hours or not attending in protest. Soldiers stood guard by the newly rebuilt wall, on high alert as rumours of a Soviet invasion grew ever stronger and the wall became increasingly militarised. The once bustling city, a bright contrast to the dreary communist side, now looked indistinguishable, with heavy rationing and the general strike taking their immense toll, skyscrapers leering in the hot night. An oppressive atmosphere of dread and weariness pervasively hung around.

The city had fallen on hard times post-1988, as with the permanent oil shortage, transporting supplies to the city became vastly harder. The East German government was relatively friendly to the West German one, and initially assisted in transporting supplies and providing oil and trucks when things got dire, in exchange for extra funding and energy. Assistance stopped after the Federation was formed. West Berlin was one of the first cities to engage in rationing after the Crash, and the city suffered heavily, with food stocks being mostly depleted all the time and protests and riots being commonplace. At one point some West German officials considered even transferring the city to East Germany to use as a bargaining tool for possibly more resources, however with the Soviet Union becoming more totalitarian by the day and its increasing belligerence, they decided against it. The city, however, remained a weak point in Western Europe’s iron curtain and a key flashpoint for a great war to start, and there was no way for the European Federation to get rid of it. The only option was to continue supplying it and stop starvation from settling in, lest the Soviets gleefully seize the opportunity.

As a result of the food shortages and all the rioting, the police and army cracked down ever harder. With law enforcement jobs being relatively well-paying, the city’s economy hardly functioning, and the ever-present threat of a Soviet invasion, the police and army became by far the largest employers of West Berlin, making up 60% of jobs in the city by 2002. The city government became more separate and autonomous from the state and federal governments, and some people were choosing to recognise it as its own state in the Federation. It was becoming a police state as the government structure became ever more authoritarian and the city ever more militarised. By 2000, it was just a shadow, starving and dehydrated with limited food and water supplies, under frequent riots and with an increasingly militarised police force shadowing the streets, surrounded by an ever-growing border wall.

Everyone knew a Soviet invasion was imminent. More soldiers, tanks and artillery had been seen across the wall recently, and the local military was put on high alert. Ever since the incident of 1998, which accelerated the militarisation of the city, people had been on edge and the military had been ever-ready. With the ongoing general strike and looming collapse of the Federation, everyone thought it was the perfect time for the Soviets to strike if they wanted to, and take back this thorn in their side. And why would Europe, already in dire straits, risk a great war or nuclear catastrophe over this small enclave?

It was half past eleven at night, and the tanks rolled in.

In an instant, tanks blasted through every checkpoint on the Berlin Wall and explosions sounded across the city. Thousands of soldiers flooded through and overwhelmed the surprised and exhausted Western guards, gunning them down with ease and making their way through the unlit streets, encountering practically no resistance. In a few hours, beating even the Federation’s most pessimistic estimates, the city fell and the Wall was broken down in days. The once bright symbol of capitalism over communism and Western superiority had fallen and the Soviet flag was hung on Checkpoint Charlie and the old Reichstag.

International reactions were surprisingly muted considering the significance of the event. The United States released a strongly-worded statement condemning the Soviet use of “aggression and opportunism”, but took no actions aside, its relations with the Federation becoming increasingly frayed. The UK couldn’t be bothered to write a letter. The Federation itself couldn’t afford to take any action beyond writing a letter and giving an emotional speech in the Alliance of Nations - if it did, the consequences were very obvious. The Federation would never invoke Article 5, despite the invasion of their territory. Even with all the reasons and excuses given by NATO members on why they couldn’t do anything about the half-hearted calls for help, the true reason was blatantly obvious - lots of NATO’s members were crumbling at the seams already. Who would want to start a World War over the tiny and pitiful West Berlin? And so, despite a few calls from the more hawkish government members to try to retake the city, it never happened, and Berlin was united whole again, this time communist..

Five years ago, in 1998, a similar crisis occurred, but with quite a different resolution. On June 5, 1998, East Germany closed all land routes to the city and the Soviet Union piled up military forces on the border, leaving the city to be inefficiently supplied by plane for a few days. Panic quickly spread as fears of an imminent Soviet invasion rapidly developed, and NATO prepared for war. As tank standoffs developed and satellites caught images of giant military movements, the Federation, desperate to protect their territory and their reputation at the time of the Nordic War, took an option that few expected - they announced that any Warsaw Pact incursion into West Berlin would be met with a full-on nuclear strike. Worry and discussion spread in the USSR - were the Europeans bluffing? Their nuclear arsenal, which was a small size of around 500, would not cause nearly as much damage to the Soviets as they could do to them. However, there was the United States and their own colossal nuclear arsenal to worry about, and despite NATO relations becoming increasingly frayed, Cold War tensions had not gone away, and there was a good chance that NATO would collectively join in if Article 5 was invoked. For a few days, the world held its breath as both sides readied their nuclear arsenals and stood poised to blow up the world at any moment.

On June 12, 1998, sighs of relief blew as the European Federation and Soviet Union announced a deal to de-escalate the crisis - both sides would stand down their nuclear arsenals, in exchange for the European Federation removing their missiles from West Germany and Italy, and the Soviets promising to not invade West Berlin and withdraw missiles from East Germany, Poland and the former Czechoslovakia. Land borders to the enclave would also be reopened and Soviet foodstuffs were allowed to operate there at a small scale. The world had narrowly evaded nuclear disaster, still not knowing the horrors to come in the following years.

The ramifications of the events of 2003 would spread across the globe, broadcasting two new messages. NATO was practically dead, just a scrap of paper. And that the Cold War was finally coming to an end, to be replaced by something much worse in its stead.

---

The Red Summer of 2003 wrought devastation on FulTec. Farms across the nation failed, irrigation collapsed, protests and riots were breaking out every day and the Federation seemed to be hurtling face-first towards collapse. FulTec’s factories and farms were being burned to the ground by angry, exhausted workers who were sick of the oppressive and brutal work environment and lots of their workers simply did not turn up, or just escaped their living quarters. In the midst of all this, it was no surprise that profit projections for the second quarter of 2003 were catastrophic, showing a 30% loss - which ended up being wildly pessimistic, but showed the grim state they were in. In response, they were forced to rapidly downsize - and the first targets for cuts were their overseas departments - chiefly the UK, Scandinavia, and Greece.

The problem with this decision was that these countries, to varying scales, relied on FulTec’s products. FulTec sold large amounts of food there and was also pressured into manufacturing there, despite higher costs and restrictions due to stricter labour laws, to entrench their influence in the countries. In addition, they delivered water with help from the federal government to water-stressed areas, such as Greece, which was facing a growing water crisis by this time and relied on the Federation to help it survive. With the collapse of these connections and the overseas departments, thousands of workers lost their jobs overnight and countries lost lots of their food production, creating a small crisis for the summer. Superfarms were left unattended and valuable food supplies were stuck in warehouses or transport. The sudden withdrawal created large amounts of animosity in these countries towards the Federation that was never solved, and changed the politics and directions of these countries until their collapse. The UK had revived their foodstuffs industry and set themselves onto a collision course with the Federation. The Nordic Union suffered the same fate. Greece was set on a path of immense tragedy and collapse. For these countries, God had finally stumbled, and fate was crushed beneath it.

---

https://youtu.be/NeP-Zx7uqrE?si=B8MSmigyN9XTSd3E 

A Pawn on the Chess Board: Greece in the Red Decade, the Second Civil War, and Collapse


Athens, 1995. The city, facing severe water shortages and lethal levels of pollution, descended into crisis as the 90s rolled on. [1]

Almost twenty years of conservative dominance in Greece since the fall of the junta in 1972 [2] was wiped out in 1989 as the socialist PASOK gained almost a supermajority in the Greek parliament, with the radical left Synaspismos not far behind. The crash of 1988 had crushed Greece’s economy underfoot, as with over a quarter of its economy based on tourism, the collapse of the industry overnight wiped out lots of the Greek economy. During the Glorious Decades, the Greek economy stood to benefit massively from the surge in tourism and advancements in aerospace technology, and so based lots of its post-dictatorship growth around it. However, the country failed to diversify and its overreliance became its downfall as the Middle East went up in flames, and the new Konstantinos Karamanlis Airport near Athens became empty and abandoned.

The country would face yet more tribulation soon after as the Hot Summer of 1990 destroyed most of Greece’s forests and agriculture, blanketing Athens with a deluge of smoke. Food was quickly becoming unaffordable and as rationing began the country entered a major food crisis. Protests sprung up in the streets and the new Prime Minister’s claims that the previous government caused the crisis by not diversifying the economy and “letting pollution run free” only did so much. The crisis did not abate as more and more forest was destroyed with each passing year, the water ran dry, and as the science of the climate crisis became clear, the people realised that a major, perhaps catastrophic crisis was hitting Greece, one that it may never recover from.

In 1993, as one of the participants of the Brussels Conference and a member of the EU, Greece was given an opportunity to join the European Federation. The government was split on the issue - a large part believed the only way to save Greece from collapse was to join the richer Federation, but a large part remained skeptical of the EU and didn’t want Greece to “surrender itself” to the Federation. With large protests and surging extremism happening in the streets, the government, in a narrow vote, decided against joining the Federation, the consequences still being debated today.

Throughout the 90s, the food and water crisis kept getting worse, however, and things were reaching a tipping point. Political violence was growing and extremist parties were surging - the communist KKE kept performing increasingly well in elections and a cluster of far-right groups formed the AE (Independence and Freedom) party, which replaced New Democracy during the decade. Desperate for help and to avoid collapse, in 1997, as the infamous ‘Black Summers’ began, Greece reached out to the European Federation, practically begging them for help. The Federation, seeing great opportunity, agreed, and a trade deal was signed on June 1st. The Federation would provide Greece with large stocks of food and water, enough to stave off the food and water crises and keep the population satiated. In exchange, Greece would let Federation advisors into its government and allow European foodstuffs megacorps to operate mostly freely, the only major taker of this being FulTec. FulTec rapidly expanded, filling a wide-open hole in the Greek market and playing a key role in (temporarily) solving Greece’s food crisis. Manufacturing plants were opened as they pressured the Greek government into butchering their labour laws, prompting mass protests from the communists. Advisors pressured the government into adopting policies benefiting European companies, and the European Federation quickly took over the Greek government. “Political advisors” were sent over during election time and FulTec donated large amounts of money to the governing PASOK, pressuring it into passing laws severely restricting activities of opposition parties. PASOK went the same way as the PES in Europe, perhaps more extreme, as corporate donors and corporate-backed candidates flooded the party and changed its makeup in the span of a year. Greece was now a puppet, a dictatorship in all but name, too weak to rebel against its European overlords. The birthplace of democracy was now its grave. 

Why did the Federation do all this? Greece was a vastly poorer nation at this point, its economy shattered by the depression, and so the Federation saw it as an easy target to dominate, and it provided a perfect opportunity for its corporations such as FulTec to expand into. The other, perhaps larger, reason was that it was a great strategic point in the Mediterranean for the Federation to counter the expanding Soviets with. Greece had become simply a tool in the proxy wars.


A demonstration against the European Federation near the centre of Athens, photographed 1999.

The populace saw what was happening and got angry. Massive protests were held on the streets of Athens and other big cities daily. Extremist groups grew massively in membership and became armed, conducting terrorist attacks on European businesses in Athens and factories in the Pelopponnese. FulTec became a popular target and was forced to hire private militias to prevent the incredibly frequent attacks from succeeding. The people aimed to make Greece as inhospitable as possible for FulTec and Europe, to force them to see Greece as a burden and leave. Europe, however, would not let Greece go so easily. Dissent and extremists were brutally squashed, with members of extremist groups getting life sentences to newly-built megaprisons handed out like (now-extinct) candy, and even the death penalty at times. European and foreign businesses had gates built at the entrances and sometimes guards to stop them from being raided, although a boycotting campaign forced lots to leave in the coming years, and this highlighted clearly the colossal wealth disparity in Greece, with the Greek and European elite at the top lording over the masses of poor at the bottom huddled in Athens’s decaying suburbs. The Soviet Union was taking note of the events, and spotted Greece as a prime target for a revolution to occur shortly. It began funding the communist KKE, which had grown an unprecedented amount of support, and other affiliated communist groups, biding its time until the match was lit. The far-right saw less foreign support, but made up for it with popular support as more migrants washed up on Greece’s beaches, often to get to the Federation. The government was forced to pass legislation in 1999, like Europe did the following year, to ban the admittance of all refugees.

Despite all the unrest, things began to settle, and by the turn of the millennium, a status quo emerged, with extremism and bombings popular in the poorer areas, but being weak enough for the government to function properly. Greece had a steady supply of food and water, preventing the country from blowing up, and for a while, things carried on as normal. PASOK remained without significant opposition, with only the KKE and far-right AE as major opponents, and both had been discredited by scandals before - lots of the KKE’s leadership was arrested for connections to the Soviets and the burning down of a suburb in Thessaloniki, and AE was responsible for a massacre near the Acropolis which killed over 50 civilians. The government was finally somewhat stable.

And then the Summer of 2003 arrived.

With next to no notice, FulTec withdrew from Greece, evacuating its personnel and abandoning its factories and farms. The Greek government expected this to happen following the immense heatwave, which was already straining the country’s food and water production, but it was caught completely off guard by the timing and rapid pace of it. Farms were left rotting and factories were left abandoned, and the country suddenly lost a large chunk of its food output. A few days later, the Federation was forced to stop the majority of water exports, choosing to focus on conservation, and Greece was poised to enter a massive crisis. The Red Summer had not left Greece unscathed - a megadrought had started across the country and temperatures soared, leaving many people to die in the streets. Anti-Federation sentiment rocketed to record highs as people saw Europe to blame for the imminent “Κρίση των πάντων” and many people and extremist groups, who had been mocked before for hating the people that kept Greece alive, now felt validated. Just a week after FulTec left and exports stopped, Greece’s stockpiles ran out and food began to become scarce, and a month later inflation was surging to over 1000%. Unrest and mass demonstrations built up in the streets, and mass movements developed, spearheaded by the far-left and right, that grew to such a level that they threatened to overthrow the government. On the 23rd of July, the military marched in and, without a fight, took over the Greek government and declared martial law and extremely strict rationing laws. The protesting, and the violence continued, at an even larger rate than before, but now that the previous government was gone and as rationing was introduced, the people calmed down a bit, with many willing to wait until summer ended and exports resumed.

They never did.

Patience was low among the Greek populace, and a few months later, as Greece’s economy was on the brink of collapse and exports still hadn’t resumed, the truth dawned among everyone. The European Federation had been heavily impacted by the general strike and FulTec had taken giant losses. They were not in a position to continue to export to Greece for at least a year, despite promising exports to them would be a higher priority, hardly any came. Greece fell into chaos, as starvation took hold, rioting and looting took over the streets. Extremist groups ballooned and took over empty rural areas and towns destroyed by the heat and drought, and Greece’s economy and society was crumbling. The government could no longer maintain order, and became desperate. On the 9th of November, they begged the Federation for aid, warning of a Soviet invasion and the collapse of their country if this continued. The European government realised the risks and sent an “emergency aid package” to the country, consisting of (relatively) large amounts of food, water and money to delay the collapse, in exchange for even more European control and influence over it, such as the practical replacement of the Greek military with the European one, mainly with the addition of European Local Protection Units. The already humiliated Greek government accepted it without a second thought of the consequences, and relief was brought to millions of Greek citizens. For a month, the country held on, cautiously optimistic they would (barely) survive the crisis as Europe promised exports soon. That was until a government official, for whatever reason, left classified documents of Federation army integration on a bench on a warm day in December.

The backlash was immediate - while a few didn’t mind the deal as long as it saved their country, many were outraged, especially the extremists. The largest wave of violence yet came to Greece, and it was the straw that broke the junta’s back. Assassinations and bombings of government and civilian buildings became commonplace, and people panicked knowing a civil war was imminent. On Monday the 12th January 2004, a series of bombings took place across Athens, destroying many government buildings and killing the Ministers for Agriculture, Defence, and Finance, and almost the Head of State himself. The KKE soon claimed responsibility for the attack and announced the beginning of a “national revolution” against the government and Europeans. That same day, affiliated militias mobilised and in a coordinated and well-planned strike took over many towns and cities in the north of Greece, including Ioannina and Thessaloniki after a long fight and much of the region of Epirus. With a declaration of war, the Second Greek Civil War had officially begun. A day later, far-right militias, organised under the formerly political banner of Freedom and Independence, took over towns in the Pelopponese and parts of the north in a more rushed operation, declaring the formation of the Greek Homeland Army (ΕΣΠ) and also declaring war against the government and the communists. A few days later, Sparti was seized and Kalamata put under siege, held desperately by the government-aligned forces. Crete was taken over in weeks by communist militias who formed a “People’s Republic” there amid heavy resistance.

A week into the conflict, alarms blared on the Aegean Islands as Turkey marched into Chios, Lesvos, Rhodes and many others, with Greece unable to resist. The following week, soldiers landed on Cyprus and in an invasion lasting two days the island was seized and annexed by Turkey. No objections were made, as no one was in the state to make any. The long-awaited invasion had occurred and anticlimactically ended.


The Second Greek Civil War, January 28th, 2004, at the point where the frontlines start to become clear.

The Greek army was in a pitiful state - at first it had been ring fenced from cuts to protect against a likely Turkish or Soviet invasion, but as the financial crisis grew larger, cuts were forced to be made. The trade deals with Europe had created a false sense of security around the country, and so the government was more open to butchering its corpse, as well as the other branches of the Greek military. Equipment was never updated and often in disrepair. Corruption of all forms was endemic throughout the structure. The Europeans had also since November been integrating their units, including LPUs, which were ran very differently to most armies, and the process had caused intense division and conflict between the troops. All in all, it was an utter demoralised shitshow, and was anticipated to get razed against the less skilled but far more motivated communists and nationalists.

But surprisingly, they actually performed rather well.

Up north, on February 4th, the communists had launched an offensive, aiming to take the town of Kozani and move towards Thesalonniki to cut the government forces off there and link the communists in the city with them. The invasion had initially started well with large ground being made by the communists and panic in government forces. However, heavy rain, incorrect instructions being passed down the command chain, and a poor logistical operation led to the attack faltering and the government launching a successful counterattack, forcing the communists back down the decrepit E90, losing thousands of men in the process. The newly-formed Workers’ Revolutionary Alliance (ΕΕΣ) was overconfident with their recent gains, hoping that the opposing armies and the central government would collapse instantly once it began to threaten them, but the government did not do that. Their army mainly consisted of green volunteers and with the whole country already facing a severe food crisis it especially struggled to feed its troops, with many soldiers getting exhausted and collapsing, or deserting. The far-right ΕΣΠ suffered from similar problems and resorted to conscription in many areas. Many of the areas it controlled, however, especially in the south, were rural and depopulated as people flocked to Athens in the 90s, and were rapidly ageing, so as the war went on, manpower shortages developed on both sides.

The government forces suffered less of these problems and more of others. The European Federation was backing its army with fresh supplies - not enough for every one of the government’s men, but enough to give it a distinct advantage over its opponents. The Federation sent advisors over to help with logistics and organisation, and while rewards early on were limited, it began to pay off in later years as the other sides developed a supply crisis. However, a much greater crisis was developing in the government - legitimacy. The government was incredibly unpopular among the people, and despite the promises of a wage and three meals a day (whether that was given is debatable), it had trouble getting people to actually want to fight for them. Conscription efforts were often met with violence and lots of the major population centres had fallen to the communists, including much of Athens. The government also suffered from manpower shortages and its soldiers were often demotivated. The Federation was forced to help alleviate it by sending its own soldiers in and providing air support, which helped the government immensely, but there was bad blood between the Greek and European forces, and large unrest remained behind the lines. Citizens refused to help the war effort and sabotage attempts were common, with towns and villages banding together to defend the culprit.

Following the failed attack on Kozani, the communists tried a different approach. Later in February and throughout March, a large-scale attack was launched on Agrinio - the hope was to link the Epirus and Patras branches of the ΕΕΣ together. This attack was more successful - Agrinio was captured on March 16th and the government forces were forced to retreat into the mountains and down to Aitoliko and Missolonghi, facing encirclement of the communists crossed the Gulf of Patras (the bridge crossing it was blown up earlier that month). But the communists were overstretched, and an attempt to encircle and destroy the retreating government forces ended in failure as supply lines faced collapse. Many communist soldiers died and they were forced to retreat and hold out at Agrinio. Similar breakout attempts by the Patras branch, as they decided in April to march east towards Athens, but supply chain issues forced the attempt to be withdrawn later that month.

The Greek Homeland Army had little more success. In the south, government forces were desperately defending Kalamata from the ΕΣΠ’s relentless onslaught as brutal conflict took place on the E55. The ΕΣΠ aimed to take the highway and strangle the city to death, however that proved more difficult than anticipated, as their early conquests were relatively bloodless. It was suggested that the offensive be redirected towards Tripoli, however the suggestion was rejected and bodies piled up on the streets of Kalamata. On the 28th February 2004 Kalamata fell, but not with heavy casualties, mainly of the ΕΣΠ. Morale was quickly dropping - Kalamata had seemed like a pyrrhic victory, and so despite the successful linking of the south west and east of the ΕΣΠ, they needed more victories, and looked to Tripoli and Megalopolis for targets. Megalopolis was taken in late March relatively easily but Tripoli was well-defended by the government and bombings from the air forced the ΕΣΠ to retreat in early April. They were also fighting up north, and achieved far more success there. An operation was conducted in March to take Thessaloniki, as government forces were busy fighting the ragtag communist army in the city. The aim was to surround both the government and communists in Thessaloniki and cut their supplies, and for once, the operation was actually mostly successful, as by April, Thessaloniki was cut off. However, the ΕΣΠ lacked ships, and so supplies, though limited, were still transported to the city. Taking it proved harder than anticipated. Problems were occurring on the Eastern front, though. West Thrace had a strong garrison there anticipating a Turkish invasion, and their main opponent now came from the west instead of the east, as the ΕΣΠ attacked. But they had become overstretched, and after a few weeks of fighting against a far superior force the ΕΣΠ was forced to retreat, and an uneasy truce settled over the front.

The initial offensives had occurred, and the government held its ground. The ΕΕΣ and ΕΣΠ had been demoralised and the communists in the cities were fighting a losing battle. Athens in particular had turned into a warzone, with suburbs such as Exarchia [3] and the city of Piraeus being taken over by mainly anarchist militias. The government assigned Athens as high priority and the city was torn apart by brutal urban warfare as suburb by suburb the leftist camps and militias were destroyed and the army took control. In the process, fires started, and with the rushed and accelerated suburbanisation of the city, large portions of it completely burned down and became unlivable. It took until 2005 for resistance in Athens to be declared “extinguished” and for the city to be fully under government control, but by then only historical landmarks such as the Acropolis were spared, gazing over a city of fire, smoke and rubble.

Throughout the next few months limited gains were made on either side as unstable supply lines and frequent natural disasters compounded troop advances, with the only gains being made by the ΕΣΠ taking most of Thessaloniki at a high cost and the ΕΕΣ finally taking Kozani. Frequent fighting tore apart families, villages and livelihoods as all sides adopted a policy of scorched earth to prevent the other side from gaining ground. Europe continued to provide support for the government, escalating it in July as the war relentlessly dragged on, desperate for the Soviets to not get involved and for the communists to be defeated quickly. Large amounts of money and troops were sent into Greece, mainly to the north west. Old bombers blew up supposed military bases, which were more often not, and rumours of chemical weapon use spread. The government made gains in Epirus throughout the summer, threatening Ioannina, and the ΕΕΣ finally began to get worried. The USSR had offered initially to help them and quickly defeat the government before Europe intervened, but the leadership of the ΕΕΣ was old and arrogant and refused it, believing they could defeat them completely on their own. As the ΕΕΣ neared collapse, however, the proposal was first considered, and soon accepted as the ΕΕΣ leadership outright begged the Soviets for help. The Soviets were firstly unsure, worried the Federation would treat it as a declaration of war, and being not in the mood to start a nuclear war. But the Federation was already weak, Berlin was taken without a hitch, and their opportunity in Greece was about to fade, and on the 7th of September 2004, Soviet soldiers and tanks marched through Albania, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria, all at once into Greece and the Federation started to panic. The Civil War had turned into a true Proxy War.


Government soldiers in Lamia defending a post, photographed December 2004

The first act of the Soviets following the invasion was to send soldiers into the ΕΕΣ headquarters and kill their leadership, replacing them with younger, more competent and opportunistic people, turning the organisation into a Soviet puppet. The USSR steamrolled into the north of Greece, wiping out the ΕΣΠ-North and the West Thrace Garrison before Turkey could act. Thessaloniki soon fell and the communist forces rapidly marched towards Athens, connecting the Epirus and Patras branches easily. The fall of the central government seemed imminent and the Federation panicked. In a moment reminiscent of the First Korean War and Vietnam War, the Federation passed the Greek Military Assistance Act of 2004, sending billions of euros and many more army divisions to land in Greece. A draft was enacted and hundreds of men were unwillingly sent to a nation they cared little for. Despite it being incredibly rushed, the  emergency deployment slowed and then stopped the Soviet advance in its tracks near Lamia. The Soviet advance was successful but lots of it was designed right before operation and ran off surprise and momentum, so the advance crumbled when faced with lots of resistance. A stalemate built in the northern front, vaguely comparable to the stalemate of the First World War.

Meanwhile, things were more optimistic for the government in the south. The ΕΣΠ had half of their forces and land destroyed and were financially and motivationally crippled. In the following few months European and Greek governmental forces took back Megalopolis and Kalamata, and took over the majority of the ΕΣΠ’s territory despite desperate resistance. The threat still remained, however - lots of the remaining ΕΣΠ forces fled into the countryside and out of view, working underground to sabotage the government. They were not truly expunged from Greece and would likely never be.

Both the government and communist sides were becoming entrenched, and with that the war became bloodier as 2004 became 2005. Costs piled up on both sides, as production costs for equipment, food and water costs, and others were continuously increasing and providing a drain to both Europe and the Soviets, and even more so the two opposing Greek governments. The war had stalemated, with both sides desperately trying to make tactical advances that would cripple the opposing side and force a surrender. Of course, that was incredibly wishful thinking and attacks were rebuffed by an equally well-equipped force on the other side, forcing a retreat and thousands of euros and rubles of lost equipment. Weapons of war were also changing, as with the immense global resource shortages, producing rifles and bullets were becoming increasingly expensive and so costs drained the finances of both superpowers. Infantry was the main tool, as tanks required too much oil and were too costly to run. Artillery was generally cheap enough to use, and so older 50s and 60s versions were operated on the battlefield, but one of the great tragedies of the war was the reintroduction of chemical weapons. They had already been used in the many conflicts of the developing world in the 90s and early 00s, including by China, but here was the first time outside of the invasion of Taiwan they were used on a large scale, as each side desperately tried to get an upper hand on the other. The attempt naturally failed and only led to far more death and suffering, but its use was never regulated and became more commonplace from there.

The other main stories were the growing anti-war movements as a result of the conflict. Protests in Russia against conscription were dealt with rather harshly (they were simply mowed down on the spot with a zeal previously unseen) but Europe hadn’t yet gotten into that level of depravity, and so anti-war and draft movements sprung up all over the place, in the cities, the political system and even the ruling government itself. The protests in 2005 and 2006, despite the deployment of the LPUs as a counter, were the largest since the strike of 2003, and rioting and draft dodging caused a great headache for the government. Many voices inside the government and establishment called for a de-escalation of the war, fearing mass unrest and a civil war in the Federation, and those numbers increased as the fighting continued. The Federation knew this was a losing battle, however, as Russia simply had more men, more factories and was just generally more powerful. Everyone in the government wanted a peace deal. But they knew the Soviets wouldn’t agree to one.

The trends continued throughout 2005 and 2006. The war had utterly stalemated and had turned into a repeat of World War 1. Both sides were becoming weakened and exhausted, with the Red Flu spreading to Greece in 2006 and causing mass deaths and desertion, and only in the middle of that year the two sides began to look for a peace deal. Negotiations took place firstly in Istanbul, then in Vienna and Warsaw. In all of those meetings, nothing was agreed, aside from maybe a reduction in nuclear weapon production that everyone knew wouldn’t be followed. Eventually, in November 2006 both sides, pressured with the spiralling costs and dissent, agreed to simply sign a truce. They would withdraw, and not interfere in the war at all. It was a tough pill to swallow for both, especially with Greece’s strategic importance, but both sides were forced to agree, and on January 28th, 2007 the Truce of Athens was signed, and Greece was left to itself. The Soviets and Europeans both withdrew all their military forces and aid spending from the country.

Greece, alone and abandoned, could only fight amongst itself. The country fell into ruin and with the constant megadrought it simply starved to death. The Civil War became not about ideology anymore, but about survival, as the government, the communists, the nationalists fractured and warlords took over the country. By 2010, the country was generally classified as a failed state, as the government only had a tenuous control of Athens and the surrounding area, with the rest being owned by militia groups or warlords in a state of constant fighting. The Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 16 destroyed the remaining organised governance that existed in the former nation as food and water ran out everywhere. The country, once famous for its history, culture and heritage sites, had lost it all to the destruction of imperialism and climate change, and became just another footnote in the Death of the Old World.

---

https://youtu.be/T9tdQROP8sA?si=TQX6dH4TihBtAhgU 

A Beacon of Democracy and Instability: Scandinavia in the 90s and the formation of the Nordic Union

Scandinavia [4] had weathered the climate apocalypse much better than most countries. Its climate was much cooler than the south of the continent, had a much lower frequency of natural disasters than lots of the world, and could grow food when much of the world couldn’t. The region as a result was far less unstable and less prone to corporations and strongmen seizing power and so kept its liberal and democratic traditions into the 2010s. There was of course lots of envy and people trying to reach it as a result, but an incredibly strict border policy since the late 90s prevented that from happening.

That did not mean its countries were not heavily affected by the Crash of 1988. Sweden, Denmark and Finland especially faced economic collapse as the price of oil surged and underwent rationing around the same time as the EU did.The Hot Summer affected them more than other countries in Europe as lots of their forest burned up and cities were drenched in wildfire smoke, causing a spike of respiratory illnesses. Norway, however, fared among the best of all the Nordic countries with its large oil reserves. They sold oil to many countries around the world, mainly the European Union, and despite the economic decline caused by the aftermath of the Sinai War and the collapse of its Sovereign Wealth Fund, they were one of the only economies to experience actual economic growth during the 90s. The country provided financial support to the other struggling Nordic countries and ties between them increased a lot as without being in any pact or alliance, they were forced to band together to survive.

Negotiations for a “Nordic Union” had started in the early 90s, at first about an economic alliance between the four countries to help them weather the depression. Negotiations were going well until the advent of the Brussels Conference in 1993, in which Denmark was invited as a participant. It was narrow, but the government of Denmark believed that joining the European Federation would be more beneficial than the Nordic Economic Union, and so bid farewell to the dream, completely unaware of what it had gotten itself into.

Discussions were initially economic, but as the Soviets and Chinese continued their wars of conquest across the world, and as the Soviet Army piled up on the Finnish border, discussion very quickly shifted to a defensive alliance alongside, and then a political one, with proposals being made for a complete union of the three countries. There was still strident opposition to it, the majority of it coming from the still-relatively-powerful right-wing forces and the growing far-left, so the proposal for a complete union didn’t get anywhere at first, most discussion being centred around a NATO-esque defensive alliance. In February 1996, the first of many agreements was signed in Stockholm, which was the formation of the “Nordic Economic Union” between Norway, Sweden and Finland, involving the formation of a free trade zone between those countries and a system to assist in development projects and transfer financial aid. The agreement produced optimism across the region, especially in Finland, whose people believed it was a stepping zone for a defence agreement which would save, or at least help protect the country from invasion.

A year and ten months later, these thoughts were brought to rest.


A Soviet tank division drives through roughly the south of Finland, photographed February 1998. Despite it being winter, hardly any snow fell, likely due to the effect of the Black Summers of 1997 and 98.

The Nordic War began on December 4th, 1997 as the Soviet Union invaded Finland without warning. Finland was ready, they had been ready for years now and already had experience fighting the Soviets in the 1939-40 Winter War. Tensions between the USSR and Finland were already incredibly high, the USSR had been distributing propaganda leaflets on the border encouraging soldiers and citizens to defect and join the richer and less starved Soviet Union. Finland had also been taking actions, and while they weren’t anywhere near as big as what the Soviets claimed, they had been performing troop maneuvers close to the border and broadcasting messages on loudspeakers. Negotiations for a defence agreement had taken longer than expected and became drawn out, with the Soviets seemingly seizing the opportunity to invade before the signing. Of course, Norway and Sweden still had the option to join the war and assist Finland, but in the end the governments decided against it, fearing occupation and the loss of their relative prosperity and men. They instead supported Finland financially, disguising their military aid packages as humanitarian aid and militarily, sending weapons alongside those packages.

The initial phase of the war was incredibly bloody, as Finland desperately tried to hold back the Soviet advance, with some success. At the southern border the Soviets were stopped past Lappeenranta, and limited progress was made up north. The major move of the Soviets, however, was an attack in the centre of the front, aiming to cut Finland off in the middle, distract their troops and launch a large strike downwards to take Helsinki. The plan worked as expected for the first few months of the war, with the Soviets making large gains, but those gains slowed as muddy terrain slowed down the Soviet Army. The war seemed to be set to drag on for a while. The USSR then made the decision to simply grind Finland down by attrition - after all, Finland was one nation, despite the help of Sweden and Norway - and the Warsaw Pact was many, and the Soviet Union much stronger. Taking Helsinki was given the utmost importance, as the Soviet troops on the south slowly marched west, taking enormous casualties in the process. The other strategy the USSR used was to blockade Finland. The main effect was to stop Sweden and Norway from sending support and intercepting their aid boats, which Finland, despite not admitting it, was generally relying on to stop the Soviets. After a Swedish merchant vessel was almost sunk off the coast of Gotland in July that year, both nations decided to stop sending aid for the fear of getting involved and sanctioned, or even possibly conquered.

Finland was unable to survive for long without Swedish and Norwegian aid and implemented strict rationing policies to hold on for as long as it could. However, dissent built up in the streets as a result and defections occurred in border towns to the more stable Soviet Union, where they at least could get a decent meal. Fearing revolution, in November 1998 the military stepped in and bloodlessly took over the government, enacting harsh conscription policies and sending every man they could to the frontline. However, the new and remaining soldiers were exhausted and unmotivated, and the Soviet advance to the capital quickened. On the 3rd June 1999, Helsinki fell to the Soviets and two weeks later, on the 19th, the Helsinki Treaty was signed, ending the war and transferring control of Finland to the Soviet Union. Initially it was under a communist Finnish-run government but on November 21st it was fully annexed by the Soviet Union, transforming it into the Finnish SSR.

The detractors of the idea of a complete union between the Nordic countries were utterly silent after the war.

Plans and talks were accelerated and Sweden and Norway made the formation of a true “Nordic Union” the first thing on their agenda. Negotiations were hard and it was often difficult to get the countries to agree to things but the threat and fear of a Soviet invasion like what was done to Finland helped them bypass these, and on the 9th July 1999, a month after the signing of the Helsinki Treaty, the governments of Norway and Sweden announced, by the turn of the millennium, the formation of the Nordic Union of Sweden and Norway, a formal uniting of the two countries. The country would basically be a loose federation, with the individual governments having large amounts of power. There would be not one singular leader, but two heads of government and state, one from Sweden and one from Norway. The heads of governments would be elected by each individual Parliament and the heads of states would be the monarchs of each individual country. It would be a very unique system born out of immense compromise in the fear of invasion - the only functions controlled by the nonpolitical federal government would be defence and related research and industry, and foreign affairs. In case of a “federal emergency” such as an invasion Article 4 of the Federal Constitution could be activated which would transfer most power to the nonpolitical federal government so that the emergency could be handled more effectively.

In the beginning there was vast optimism about the agreement, with the majority being in favour, and on September 2nd symbolic referendums were conducted in the two countries, with 63% being in favour in Norway and 68% in Sweden, which were narrower margins than expected, but still substantial victories and enough justification to unite. On the 20th February 2000, after some delays to finalise the agreement, the Nordic Union of Sweden and Norway was formed. Initial proceedings went smoothly - the heads of the Swedish and Norwegian militaries formed their defence cabinet out of their preferred members of the militaries (an advisory council was formed as to not let nepotism and corruption take precedence), and elections on March 3rd resulted in the dominant Social Democratic Party of Sweden and Norwegian Labour Party keeping power. The Union would vote 69-31 to join NATO on April 11th.


The flag of the Nordic Union of Sweden and Norway (big credits to u/JebbyFanclub on this post love the flag)

The optimism did not last for very long.

Looking at the 2000 Nordic elections, some disturbing trends were revealed. The centre-right had practically collapsed, alongside most of the moderate left, and in their place extremism rose. In Norway, the right-wing Progress Party made record gains and displaced the Conservatives, and the Red Electoral Alliance scored record results, taking many voters from the more moderate Socialist Left. In Sweden, the Swedish Democrats reached record highs, despite not displacing the Moderates yet, they were getting close, and the newly radicalised Left were surging. [5] The reasons why were not obvious at first, but soon became clear - many people were stridently and loudly opposed to the Nordic Union. The centre-right were “somewhat opposed” but ended up accepting it, angering many of its old voters and causing a giant shift to the far-right, and on the far-left, concerns were brewing about the newly moderate turn of the centre-left to gain new moderate voters, and additionally due to a dislike of the Nordic Union, the far-left gained heavily at moderate left’s expense.

A criticism of the Union among many was also that it didn’t go far enough. The two states were still mainly separate, with them controlling the vast majority of functions, and a defensive alliance would have been broadly the same. The structure of the Union seemed like a compromise, and while people were happy with it at first, it did not take long for people to point out the flaws and grow sour on it. The compromise structure truly pleased nobody - people in favour of the Union wanted it to go further, and people against it claimed there was no point in having it exist, and that all it did was weaken the countries’ sovereignty and provide more precedent to weaken it further.

For a few months, the Nordic dual governments worked as usual with minor incidence, until an ugly issue reared its head again - Europe.

The much more powerful European Federation had been constantly suffering under heatwave after heatwave throughout the 1990s. Crop failures were common and as the natural food market precipitously declined, the foodstuffs industry filled the gaps and became incredibly powerful. The biggest beneficiary was FulTec, which consisted of a majority and growing part of the foodstuffs industry, and was expanding past the Federation. Scandinavia wasn’t the perfect place for growing food - the Nordic Union had a minor food crisis themselves, but its cooler climate and relative safety from climate disasters (aside from wildfires) meant that it was one of the better places for agriculture in this new world. FulTec in the late 90s began to invest heavily in creating new farms and buying land in Sweden and Norway. This of course was not appreciated by the public and the governments, especially due to reports of human rights violations on these new superfarms, and so both countries passed new anti-monopoly laws to stop their overexpansion into the emerging Nordic foodstuffs markets. Europe protested this, and in 1998 sent ships to the Swedish coast to attempt to blockade the country. However, Europe had just been through the Channel Crisis with the United Kingdom, and with relations already frayed, decided not to overextend itself just yet and withdraw the blockade.

Europe’s food situation was marginally improved by 2000, helped by the new agreements with the UK, but the country wanted to prepare in case mass drought or a giant heatwave occurred. The country then looked to the newly formed Nordic Union, and decided action must be taken. On June 21st, 2000, while on a training exercise, a European warship spotted a Nordic merchant vessel close to crossing in the middle of it. Not knowing what the ship was, and fearing they would be attacked, in a moment of irrationality, the warship fired on the vessel and destroyed it, at least that’s how the story went. Every container ship of every country was valuable in these times, and so the Nordic Union demanded explanations from the European Federation - why they blew up their vessel without warning or any attempt at contacting the ship, and why they were holding a training exercise right next to Nordic waters without notice. Europe gave its arguments, but they were feeble and everyone knew that, and was soon threatening the Union to alter its trade routes in the North Sea, or face war. They refused, and the Nordic Union moved a fleet of ships into the North Sea near Denmark as a show of force. Europe followed suit, and a standoff developed. Panic built up in the Union, fearing they would go the way of Britain, but also not wanting to provoke a war, as they knew they would be quickly defeated. Just a few months in, the Nordic Union was already facing an existential crisis, and the dual governments were unprepared to deal with all of this.

Europe then decided to take things a step further - a week following the standoff, the Norwegian coast was surrounded by European warships bristling with guns. A blockade was threatened, unless the Nordic parliament could negotiate its way out and to a more favourable trade position with Europe. The Nordic government was forced to cave, and details of a trade deal would soon be released. The labour laws of the Norwegian and Swedish governments would be heavily weakened, for instance, work safety and overtime protocols would be butchered. The laws on the operation of foreign companies in the Union would also be weakened, giving FulTec much more room to expand, and the deal would force the Federation to make up a majority of the Union’s imports, despite already making up a large plurality. The people of the Union unanimously opposed the bill, launching massive protests in Oslo and Stockholm reaching close to two million people in total, some even escalating to riots. Every party in the parliaments was critical, the far-right and left especially so, and extremist support grew rapidly following. The social democratic governments of both the nations emphasised it was necessary to avoid war and an even worse situation, but that generally fell on deaf ears. A record wave of anti-Federation sentiment swept the country and fundamentally changed its culture, economy, and politics.

International response was limited. Britain released a harsh statement condemning the European acts, having been through this some years before, but was unable to do anything but watch. The United States was ambivalent and Canada sympathetic but generally uncaring. The Nordic Union had realised, just months after joining NATO, that its true enemies were not outside of it, but inside all along.

The years of 2001 and 2002 were dominated by unrest and rioting, a new thing for the Union mostly due to its better food and water situation. It was not reaching the same levels as the Federation down south but terrorism was still common, mainly against FulTec. As in many countries, factories were blown up and farms burnt down and private guards released gunfire, trying to defend the giant superfarms as much as possible. The Federation ideally would have been able to place its own soldiers in the nation to defend the farms but that was a red line for the Union and also would have led to civil war, so it never happened. Government buildings were also commonly attacked by extremists as well as the headquarters of large European businesses. Despite the unrest most of them stayed, as Scandinavia was a uniquely powerful economy to invest in with its better climate and stability compared to countries such as Greece, where most left. The Union would continue trudging on, slowly falling apart as violence and disagreement began to break it. That was until the summer of 2003, when Europe was burned alive and Scandinavia regained its freedom once more.

FulTec had already pulled out of Greece and the UK following the Red Summer but it was hesitant to do so in the Nordic Union. The comparatively low levels of violence compared to the former two and much better climate and amount of land for growing food made it a much larger food producer for the Federation, with most of its non-Federation based food being grown there, as well as being the only place it could get readily-available somewhat natural food, despite the low yields. However, as the Federation was weaker than ever, the Nordic Union sprang into action, revoking the universally hated trade deal on the 1st of July and barring FulTec from operating there on the same day, seizing control of its superfarms and factories. Europe was outraged but powerless and had far more pressing concerns at the time. The Nordic Union now had freedom, for the first time in years, and it would not waste it.

---

Dusk turns to Night: The United Kingdom in the 90s and early 00s

https://youtu.be/nE0azgwzRQc?si=07CIOD6t2Z-YyPZi 

The 1989 general election was an utter wipeout for the British Conservative Party, falling into third place behind the Liberal Democrats as Labour gained a colossal majority in the House of Commons. The Conservatives were crushed on all sides, having lost any support they originally had in the north over deindustrialisation and the privatisation of the NHS [6], and having lost the south to the Liberals over the economic collapse. Like others in Europe, despite development of North Sea oil and gas over the past few years, the UK’s economy was still heavily impacted by the jump in oil prices and the economy fell into ruin within months.

Labour spent its first year reversing much of the neoliberal policy of the previous 19 years of Conservative government, maintaining high approval ratings throughout, however, their honeymoon was disrupted by the 1990 Hot Summer. Most of the UK didn’t suffer from severe wildfires like much of the world due to its relatively low tree cover, however, record forty-degree heat hit the country and the most severe drought ever encroached, making reservoirs run dry and burning up massive amounts of crops. Crisis emerged as famine hit the country and the UK, being a food importer, struggled to meet demand for food, and to a lesser extent, water. The government struggled to keep order as the famine led to an immense crime wave and sprees of looting, stretching the police to its limits. However, it was doing much better than many other countries, such as Spain and Italy who suffered from much worse famines and were quickly falling into chaos. The situation in the UK and much of Europe was moderately alleviated by support from other nations, mainly the United States and Canada, who sent shipments of food to stop it from falling to revolution (as even to the isolationist President Graves, a collapsed Europe was not something America could afford). But that did not stop the Prime Minister’s announcement of the beginning of rationing, a policy that ended up never being reversed.

Britain had survived, and was arguably doing better than most of Europe, but faced ever more chaotic weather as the 90s marched forward, chiefly rain and flooding. The weather got increasingly difficult to predict, especially as the Met Office was strapped for funds - you could have torrential rain one day, the next crippling sun and heat, and storms were also getting more extreme. These events caused damage and destruction to many communities, but the main destroyer was flooding. Many towns and cities in the south and north suffered frequent, intense floods every year, ruining the local economy and causing many to leave to more elevated areas, but arguably the city that suffered the most was London. The city had already been struck by floods throughout its history, but this time they were reaching a new level, the Thames Barrier struggling to hold against the rushing water. The barrier, operational since 1983, was not built for the rapidly rising sea levels in the 90s, and so a new system was planned in - colloquially called the “Thames Wall”, which was designed to protect the city theoretically for sea levels at four degrees of warming, though many doubted it could. Construction began in 1993, but the project quickly became immensely costly, reaching into the billions of pounds, and with the extreme weather, progress was slow and work dangerous. Despite putting the project at high priority, the British economy had been facing a fiscal crisis and immense budget cuts since 1991, and struggled to find new revenue to fund the project. Seeking to cut costs, wages of the workers were kept low, and that became a grave issue when strikes broke out in 1995 over the terrible working conditions on the Wall, halting work for a crucial few months. Negotiations soon reached an agreement involving an above-inflation pay rise (which was key when looking at the incredibly high inflation since 1988) and safety measures to be put in place, but that drove up the cost immensely, and in 1996 the project was mostly shelved, with around half of it to be built in the end and small extensions to be implemented over time. These half-measures were simply not enough and London faced a catastrophic flood in 1999 which overwhelmed the new barrier completely. Many poor neighbourhoods in East London were devastated - thousands of homes and flats were destroyed and the reconstruction costs were immense, far too much for the government to pay. It was yet another symbol of the growing class divide in the nation, and those worst affected did not have the funds to move out to safer areas.


The aftermath of the Flood of 1999 in Barking, London. The area was relatively poor and working-class, and so its inhabitants disproportionately suffered compared to other areas.

It was not only East London that was affected - the financial centre was, too, and the impacts of that were perhaps more devastating for the country. Despite the precipitous decline of the world’s finance sectors, the centre of London still held great importance to the national economy, and the flooding of 1999 damaged that immensely as many major buildings and centres despite the protection were flooded. In light of all this, London’s national importance was declining, and other cities which were less flood-prone and had cooler climates were regaining their status once more, which had been stolen from them as British manufacturing collapsed in the 80s and London’s financial clout rose exponentially. Assets were being moved to Manchester, factories were rebuilt near Liverpool and Leeds, and coal mines were dug near Sunderland and Wakefield, to give a few examples. Population shifts were occurring at a great rate as people fled London and other low-lying cities in the south (and north) to stabler cities, where manufacturing was growing and employment prospects far more optimistic. London, with its decaying suburbs, constant flooding and dirty slums [7], had practically lost its place in the sun by the 90s, and the 1999 flood sealed its fate. The city continued on a steady decline throughout the years, though it still remained the nation’s capital due to the large costs of changing it. The sudden capital and demographic shifts did not come without their problems, though - the influx of people led to housing shortages, and while things were not as bad as in many American cities, the conflict arising from these shifts became brutal, and at this point, one major comes into play that helped define the UK’s chaotic political scene in the 90s and 00s - immigration.

The government position on immigration during the early 70s was generally strict, with the introduction of legislation such as the Immigration Act 1971 and the earlier Commonwealth Immigration Acts providing heavy restrictions on generally non-white immigrants. As the neoliberal faction took power in the landslide of 1977, however, things began to change quickly. Britain’s economy was booming following the signing of the Shanghai Accords, and construction of new suburbs and other city developments led to large amounts of job creation. Britain’s birth rate wasn’t as high as the United States but it was relatively so compared to the rest of Europe, and there were plenty of workers to fill the gaps, but additionally with the expansion of the university system [8], British workers preferred to go into more white-collar jobs. The government soon spied an opportunity to fill these places - immigrants. With the passage of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1981 among others, restrictions on immigration were relaxed and numbers increased rapidly. This came with caveats, including racism and the concentration of them in specific areas (as a result of the racism they basically group together), but they were able to integrate sort of successfully over the years. 1988 came and went, however, and many people suddenly found themselves out of jobs. On top of this, large numbers of refugees were flooding in from the Middle East, which soon began to increase tensions. The refugees were never able to find jobs mainly due to racism and generally being less skilled than many Brits or 80s immigrants but that did not stop them from being scapegoated and targeted for attacks. The refugees also failed to integrate and ended up being clustered either in camps or claustrophobic, moulding housing in city centres.

The new Labour government was suffering with the constantly recessing economy and approval ratings were dropping, and to save their popularity they targeted a group they knew was unpopular and everyone disliked - of course, the immigrants. In an infamous 1992 speech, the Prime Minister called the 80s immigrants “sickening offspring from the vile Conservatives” and blamed the new refugees and 80s immigrants for “stealing jobs from our proud British men” and announced they would pass laws to restrict entry and job applications for immigrants. The speech and policy (depending on who you speak to) utterly backfired, as sharp criticism was drawn from most parties and soon the outright hostile environment led to mass unemployment among immigrant communities. They quickly turned to desperation, and desperation turned to violence, as rioting overtook the inner cities of London, Birmingham, Leeds and many others. It wasn’t only the immigrants taking part, but young, socially liberal voters who had enough of the blaming and distractions of the Labour government, and this helped create yet another threat to Labour - the economically and socially far-left Greens, who in local elections next year made great gains in city centres. The violence also led to divisions among the immigrant communities themselves - many 80s immigrants resented the Middle Eastern refugees who they believed caused the violence against them, leading to infighting between them. Perhaps the worst consequence of all was the rise of a horrifying, new force on the fringes of the far-right - the British National Party.


The burning of a tower block in Brixton as a result of a BPF riot in the area. Photographed 1996.

The BNP were initially near insignificant, winning just 0.2% of the vote in the 1984 general election, but the people had now been pushed to desperation, and the rioting and chaos had provided new energy and ammunition for the party. They gained 116 seats in the 1993 local elections, mainly in city centres and the East of England, which was their base. Coastal erosion and immense flooding had devastated many communities there and despite the area having hardly any immigrants, the already-broke right-wing people were quick to blame them and so underwent mass radicalisation to the BNP. The same year, massive anti-immigrant protests and riots took place primarily in Essex and Lincolnshire, and backlash was underway. The government took action to suppress the growing Far-right, who took up arms [9] in response and formed the British Patriot Front paramilitary in late 1994, naming themselves after the recently formed National European Front. The BPF was of course banned by the police and was labelled as a terrorist group following several bombings in Leicester, but remained a significant underground force and caused havoc in many cities like their European cousins. Alongside the IRA (which will be discussed in the Britain interlude), the BPF regularly conducted bombings and stabbings and even lynchings on the city streets, mainly operating in the newly-built labyrinthine central slums. The cities of Britain suffered from terrorist attacks weekly, the phenomenon becoming a new normal to the weary people. A cat-and-mouse game was played between the government and the BPF for several years, the police receiving budget increases (revolutionary for the 90s!) while all other sectors continued to suffer under the boot of austerity. Despite the existence of the BPF, the BNP, buoyed by race riots but also by the increasingly heavy austerity, was gaining support, winning several seats in the 1994 and 1999 elections and coming into the mainstream of British politics. The government knew something would have to be done, but there were no pleasant options, and “drastic action” would have to wait until later.

Despite the consequences, however, it could be argued that the immigration backlash helped the Labour government, providing a distraction from economic woe and the chaotic climate, preventing them from falling further in the polls despite the split left-wing vote. Better for them for the press to be focused on deportations rather than benefit cuts, after all. [10]

Above even immigration, flooding and the collapsing economy, the biggest issue defining British politics during the 90s was definitely the European Federation and fishing rights.

What the UK needed most during the 90s and every following decade was food. The Hot Summer was devastating to British agriculture and during that time it was forced to rely on US and Canadian exports. These were not enough for the long-term and so the British government put in provisions and policy to expand the food supply. One of those was the expansion of fishing and the expansion of the area that the UK could fish, which caused great ire in the European Federation, who was also suffering from similar problems and didn’t want the UK to get ahead. Another point of conflict was related to foodstuffs. The Labour government had introduced strong anti-monopoly laws following their election and as a result British foodstuff companies which emerged in the mid-90s were numerous and constantly in competition with each other, unlike in the US and Federation where one company dominated over all. In the Federation, FulTec was growing and wished to expand, and saw the UK as fertile ground with it’s competitive environment, believing it could easily steamroll over the smaller companies with it’s money and power. Operations in Britain thus began in 1995 and continued for some years. FulTec regularly used underhanded tactics to gain an advantage - they often bribed other companies, used force to take over farms and breached labour laws by paying their workers far below the minimum wage (these workers were often refugees forced from the streets). Naturally, the British government despised this intrusion, and FulTec’s tactics were practically an open secret, but there was not yet enough evidence to prosecute the company, and Europe was likely to fight back hard against that. That all changed when an MI5 investigation combined with an “accidental” documents leak led to FulTec losing millions of euros in a court challenge and being forced to heavily scale back operations in the country. Europe challenged this but failed, and the Federation and the UK’s relations grew ever worse, and a conflict began to loom.

https://youtu.be/0Yt0ffGB2qg?si=qeKyzx8B5qd4ANVo 

Tensions came to a head on September 22, 1997 when a group of fisherman in the English Channel accidentally strayed slightly beyond the dividing line for where each country could fish, and came into contact with some European destroyers. They fired on the fisherman in response, threatening them to go away, but for a currently unknown reason (theories include strong currents or some miscommunication), the fisherman did not retreat and went towards the destroyers. Four fishermen were killed in the incident and four more taken hostage - the UK responded with outrage and demanded the fishermen be returned - the Federation had finally gotten a bargaining chip and planned to use them to gain concessions out of the UK, chiefly weaker labour laws and an expanded fishing zone. The idea the UK would agree to negotiations was a fatal assumption and the Royal Navy was deployed in the Channel the following day, surrounding a similar group of European destroyers and planning to do so until the fishermen were returned. It was an incredibly risky move, and the magnitude of it was displayed when, in a moment of panic, one of the European destroyers opened fire and damaged a British cruiser. At that moment it was clear to all that European-British relations would never be the same again.


One small misfire could lead to millions dead.

Miraculously, all ships held their fire, everyone unwilling to go to war over some fishermen. For a day the European ships remained surrounded and the Channel became swarmed with warships from both sides, all preparing for war. It was close, but at the last minute secret negotiations mediated by the United States led to the end of the crisis and the withdrawal of ships from the Channel. The official agreement was soon finalised and signed in neutral Dublin on January 4, 1998. It was a lot more comprehensive than was described, but the major headline-grabbing provisions were that the English Channel would be demilitarised and made a neutral zone, and that the UK would have more sea to fish in in exchange for the Federation having more sea to move their ships in. The agreement did temporarily defuse UK-EF tensions and set the stage for peace until 2003, meaning that in some eyes it was successful, at least as much as it could be for these times. However it was blatantly rushed out, with both sides appearing dissatisfied at many of the provisions, and many considered that to be part of the reason for the brutal subjugation of the country seven years later.

But for the five years between what became known as the Channel Crisis and the Red Summer, things were relatively peaceful between the UK and the Federation. Seeing the country as too powerful and worrying about the start of a great war, the Federation decided against taking further action against the UK - FulTec was at least operating in it. They preferred to go after the newborn, weaker and more arable Nordic Union instead. Despite some minor crises and incidents the Dublin Agreement held and the Channel remained neutral.

On the home front things were also growing calmer through these years. The government was fighting a protracted war against the BPF, and in response introduced lots of “anti-terror” legislation, significantly boosting the power of the police and security apparatus. Many criticised these laws as “dystopian” and lots of it came from the budget cuts made to pass it, however, whether by fault of the laws or not, in 1999 a major BPF cell was infiltrated and destroyed, capturing and killing lots of the group’s leadership. A domino effect began and soon the majority of the group’s cells and membership were destroyed and arrested, providing a killing blow to the organisation in what was called Britain’s most successful anti-terror operation ever. The operation also had the effect of associating the anti-terror laws with it, significantly increasing their popularity and setting the UK on the slow path to a surveillance state. The BNP suffered a drop in support as well as a result, and Labour’s position finally seemed somewhat stable. The UK also in 2001 finally started negotiations with Ireland over Northern Ireland, seeking to put an end to the IRA’s continuous violence that had been occurring since the 70s. Things were slowly beginning to look up.

Then 2003 arrived and brought the Red Summer with it as London experienced lethal 45 degree heat, the first instance ever recorded. Thousands were dropping dead as the nation was completely unequipped to deal with the heat and catastrophe emerged as in much of Europe. The nation was lucky to have lots of its agriculture moved up north, however, and so unlike Europe the UK did not have a major food crisis and was able to keep food prices from spiking too high. FulTec, heavily damaged by the summer, wanted to stay but found the hostile environment too much of an impediment for the increased production to be worth, and so withdrew completely in July, and with the Federation on the verge of collapse, the British Prime Minister gave a speech, announcing that the Dublin Agreement was “null and void” and that he would ensure the Federation would never pose a threat to the country again. The following day, British ships filled the Channel in a show of force, and the Federation could do nothing but watch and plot revenge.

---

https://youtu.be/mdEt4FevfpY?si=gBjDB7dOHag0ywuo 

One Last Gasp of Freedom: Northern Europe following the Red Summer, and the formation of NAFTA

Both the UK and the Nordic Union were swept with anti-European fervour following 2003. Perhaps the biggest targets were businesses - the European-owned ones were often larger, richer and dominated over the few remaining smaller local ones. This didn’t hurt the local citizens but them being foreign and more powerful made them an easy target for the people, and most were shut down or outright destroyed following 2003. The Red Summer had sort of created a feeling of newfound freedom among the British and Scandinavians (moreso among the latter), and nationalistic sentiment took over. Incumbent parties were heavily boosted - in the UK, an early election in 2004 led to Labour winning over 430 seats due to a “rally around the flag” effect, and the incumbent socialist governments won again in Sweden and Norway in the same year, working with all other parties in “Government(s) of National Unity”. New problems awaited these countries, though, with the Federation, if it didn’t collapse, almost certain to come roaring back with a vengeance, among many others, and the two nations realised cooperation was necessary to survive in this brave new world.

A major issue resulting from the withdrawal of FulTec was food production. The problem was less in the UK, where FulTec had been restricted by strong anti-monopoly laws, but was more acute in the Nordic Union where FulTec had been allowed to control large amounts of the foodstuffs and agricultural industry. As FulTec withdrew, it abandoned the farms and factories it had been operating, and many were not reopened in time or were sabotaged, becoming useless. Later research showed this had increased (avg.) food prices by around 20% in the UK, and 45% in the Nordic Union and it took until late 2004 for them to fully recover. To fill up the gap, domestic-owned agriculture was expanding, but not fast enough, and to alleviate the shortage, trade was expanded. On the 26th September 2003, it was announced in Bergen that the North European Free Trade Area (NEFTA) would be formed between the UK, Nordic Union and later Ireland, and would cover most vital products, mainly food. The North Sea was now fully under control by British and Scandinavian ships as the Federation was still recovering from the Red Summer, so trade was easy and quick, with warships often helping transport things themselves and often escorting container ships. Another part of the deal was the agreement of the equal division of the North Sea between the two for the use of fishing, which was still seen as viable despite the immense decline in fish populations. Foodstuffs companies were also looking to the seas by this time as new ideas were coming to fruition. NEFTA worked well and despite some domestic criticism helped stabilise the situations in the two countries. Another trade opportunity, however, revealed itself the following year - the large and agriculturally fertile nation of Canada.


A cargo ship crossing the Northwest Passage, pictured January 2005. The rapid melting of the Arctic led it to become a viable trade route between Europe and Canada, as more crops were being grown in the country’s north.

Canada had been heavily impacted by 1988 but, like Scandinavia, had weathered the climate crisis fairly well. Its cooler climate allowed more crops to be grown and was opening vast amounts of land for agriculture, meaning it could afford only a small foodstuffs industry and could still feed almost all of it’s population with natural food, a rarity in most countries. The nation wished for a market to sell it to, and struggled to find opportunity - relations with the United States had been precipitously declining in the past few years, the European Federation was skeptical and preferred to keep to it’s own continent, and Northern Europe feared European retaliation. There was also the issue of the sea ice making trade routes risky and the United States sending ships to threaten blocking trade routes. However, the Arctic sea ice was melting at an unprecedented rate, the area experiencing it’s first ice-free summer in 2004, and the Federation was incredibly weakened. In summer 2004, as sea ice was at it’s lowest ever extent, Canada contacted the UK and Nordic Union, and in a matter of months a trade deal was finalised. NEFTA would be expanded into NAFTA - the North Atlantic Free Trade Area - due to Canada’s introduction. Food would remain the main transported product. Two major trade routes would be used - one from the St Lawrence River, and the other being the Northwest Passage, which was becoming a viable route due to the sea ice melting. More and more Canadian agriculture was being done in the rapidly warming, underpopulated north, and the opening of the passage allowed food to be directly transported from source to destination.

NAFTA received skepticism and mixed reception from abroad. The United States and Canada had been at odds for a few years, and trade between the two countries was limited. Upon the formation of the pact, however, worry and jealousy spread through it - worry that they would all team up to surpass or block the US completely from their trade, and jealousy that so much natural food was being transported to feed Northern Europe but not North America. They could do nothing but watch and wait for Europe to respond, however. Communication from the Federation in the years following the Crackdown was limited, but whatever came out appeared resentful of the treaty, and signs were showing a military buildup in the Federation. The majority of other countries were generally indifferent.

Domestically, NAFTA was immensely successful, helping bring down food prices to normal levels. Reception was mostly positive in all countries, and negotiations were soon being expanded to other areas of cooperation. Suggestions included defence and technology, which would both undoubtedly bring great benefit, but unfortunately alliance take time to create, and time was not on everyone’s side, as by late 2004, the Federation began knocking on Northern Europe’s doors once more. 

---

https://youtu.be/_ea6Qv-YfeY?si=EqS_sWLQB2Q_HjJl 

The Iron Chains that Bind: The Rise of Neo-Colonialism in the Western World

By 2004, the European Federation was beginning to recover from the Red Summer. 2004 was cooler and marginally wetter than the last year, and food production and reservoirs were slowly recovering. FulTec was more powerful than ever before, many more foodstuffs were produced, and large dissent was dying down. The nation, though, had clearly been irrevocably changed by the events. Electricity prices remained unaffordable to most, and the government prioritised a giant project to build many nuclear plants across the Federation as a result, with disastrous results to come. The biggest change arguably came from the food - whatever natural food remaining had also become unaffordable to the populace, with most farms burned, and to fill that gap, FulTec stepped up to the task. Massive tracts of land were reserved for new superfarms and factories, as foodstuffs replaced all other foods in European markets. These were not the same as the old, 90s foodstuffs as well - the new ones as a result of the Red Summer had degraded in quality and lacked the nutrients and flavour the old ones had. FulTec, over the following years, experimented with many other methods to feed Europe’s population, some less successful than others.

Federal land was quickly being used up at a vast rate, and massive heatwaves still threatened to decimate the continental mainland, making the simple act of building there unviable in the short term. FulTec was then led to look north, to the countries of the United Kingdom and the Nordic Union, where they formerly held many of their farms and factories. The two nations by this point had fully separated from Europe, moving all their trade with them to Canada. Any advances by FulTec there would be fully rejected, as even in the incredibly unlikely scenario of the governments accepting them back in, the people of these nations would riot and protest violently, making operations there unsustainable. Despite these risks, the Federation and FulTec needed these nations land to survive in the future, and so in the middle of 2004, FulTec was given two objectives - In the United Kingdom and Nordic Union, ensure the governments allow access and development with few restrictions, and ensure the populace do not resist effectively. Achieving both those tasks were easier said than done, but FulTec had no choice but to achieve them.

They could either have done this the diplomatic way or the forceful way. FulTec could only choose the latter.

Thousands of hours of work led to the publishing of the plans for Operations Lion and Wolf late that year, for the UK and Nordic Union respectively. Both of those plans were similar in structure, the major difference being that Operation Lion would be performed first to catch the stronger UK off guard and destroy NAFTA, and Wolf would be performed afterwards, hoping the weaker Scandinavia would surrender quickly. The structure of the plans were generally similar, with Lion being written more in-depth due to being inherently riskier, as the Royal Navy was still a formidable force, especially when compared to the decaying FEN (Federal European Navy). Information about the plans was kept incredibly secret, even to the President, with him and his inner circle only knowing three key words referring to the three main phases - Precedence, Confrontation, De-escalation. The wording of them led him to feel disappointed - it felt too similar to the other incidents of the early 90s that led to FulTec dominating their food markets. Such a strategy likely wouldn’t work now, with the two nations alert and cautious. The operations were scheduled for the beginning of 2005, and the European President would see just how wrong he was in these thoughts.

Throughout late 2004, Europe became increasingly belligerent with the United Kingdom, especially following the creation of NAFTA. European warships constantly threatened British waters and it seemed that every day there was a new threat made towards Britain to direct more trade to the Federation. Britain was put on high military alert and fears rose that an invasion was imminent. An actual land invasion would naturally be impractical, with the Royal Navy being powerful enough to deter most invasions and weather in the Channel becoming increasingly volatile. The Royal Navy recognised this and planned instead for other naval confrontations, including a blockade. This, in the end, proved to be a mistake. The Federation was determined to outwit them and went for one of the least expected options - an incredibly risky but possibly rewarding one. The Federation demanded, among other things, that Britain reduce its EEZ and the area it fishes in, as it was expanded following 2003. Of course, the number of fish, and anything in the sea, was a small fraction of what it was even in the 80s. Britain just waved away the issue, essentially telling the Federation the issue no longer mattered and hoped they would simply forget. One of Britain’s biggest mistakes was not figuring out the Federation’s, more accurately FulTec’s, true motives.


A typical Royal Navy ship in the mid-2000s, built in the 1980s and being hurriedly refurbished occasionally since. Hardly any new ships were built following 1988 due to high costs and it was generally preferred by most nations to focus on maintenance.

The sparks of war were ignited when on January 2nd 2005, a European fleet raided and sunk a British container ship near the Isles transporting food heading from Canada. An ultimatum was sent by the Federation: abolish NAFTA immediately or they will destroy it themselves via blockade. The British treated it as an act of war and sent ships there to challenge the blockade - however that ended disastrously when European ships opened fire and a brief naval battle led to 8 sunk British ships and 3 sunk European ones. The United Kingdom declared war against the Federation, and the Nordic Union was put on alert for imminent invasion, not officially joining the war itself. More naval battles occurred in the following days near British waters, however many of the them were inconclusive as both sides, as in World War 1, both countries were reluctant to lose ships, and many of what they had were old and decaying anyways so they were a struggle to manage [11]. It was anticipated that the war would be fought primarily on the naval front, especially on the seas west of the British Isles, and so the majority of initial battles were fought there, with British ships desperately defending Canadian container ships. The war did have the effect, however, of slowing trade between Canada and Northern Europe dramatically, effectively cancelling NAFTA. The British government did consider using it’s nuclear arsenal to threaten the Federation, however as it was fearful of a nuclear war, and as it’s arsenal was ageing and untested, it decided against it for the duration of the conflict.

The war continued throughout early 2005 and led to minor shortages in Britain as Europe additionally blocked trade to and from the Nordic Union. However, the war was stagnant, only consisting of minor naval battles, and both sides knew something had to and would change. At the end of March, as the war appeared to die down, FulTec began the next phase of Operation Lion, with the Precedence (ultimatum) and Confrontation (the war) being completed, the last phase was the De-Escalation, and in it, FulTec would reveal their decisive trump card - their remaining agents in the UK.

Following 2003, the vast majority of FulTec members in the UK left the country, primarily due to the hostile environment there, but some of them were ordered to stay. Lots of these members had close ties with the British government, and were instructed to remain and build up ties there in case FulTec planned to return some day. As Operation Lion was being drafted, FulTec renewed contact with these members, and briefed them on the operation. It was by sheer luck and incompetence they weren’t caught, and the third phase of the operation was scheduled for early 2005. The members built up a supply of arms and spread themselves out in the major cities of the nation, biding their time until given the signal. On the 23rd of March that year, the De-Escalation began, and the signal would fire in the form of rising smoke on the Thames.

That day, radar spotted a fleet of European warships heading straight through the lower North Sea right towards the mouth of the Thames. The English Channel was regularly patrolled by the Royal Navy, and so a squadron of ships quickly encountered the European fleet, however, it was not enough, and so the RN fleet was damaged and retreated. An earlier major battle in the Celtic Sea had already occupied many British ships, and so few could be spared, and it came to the UK’s horror that it was a distraction all along. The European fleet entered the Thames Estuary, and with a combination of partly skill, mainly insane luck, and a once-in-a-generation flood that hit the Thames hard, it made it all the way through the Thames into London with little resistance and started bombing the flooded city. The chaos and smoke emerging from the north bank was the signal the undercover members needed, and in hours a band of disgruntled former BPF members was organised, having been gathered months earlier in preparation for the operation and sedated with bribes. The group marched on Parliament from all sides and forcefully broke into the building, invading the Commons chamber and holding it hostage. Similar events happened in Birmingham, Liverpool, Newcastle and other major cities as the BPF (which was promised a role in the new government) stormed and took over local government [12] headquarters. Protests sprung up, but the overall mood was confusion, and the UK was temporarily powerless to resist against the Federation.


European soldiers marching through a flooded and ruined London. Photographed March 28th, 2005 - the day of the surrender.

With the lull in communication, the English Channel was subsequently breached and European soldiers stormed the island, taking over the south in days. Most of the captive MPs did not live past the first day as many, including the Prime Minister and his Cabinet, were killed to “save food”. The BPF wrought havoc on the streets. The country, in total chaos, fell easily to the encroaching Europeans, who on the 28th of March, announced the “surrender of the United Kingdom” and the agreement of the formation of a new government. It would trade exclusively with the Federation and allied countries and allow FulTec almost free reign with British foodstuffs, essentially turning the United Kingdom into a puppet of the Federation. The UK also reduced it’s fishing zone heavily and acceded to practically all European economic demands. The new government formed was of the remaining members of the Labour Party and a group of FulTec executives providing intimidation. The BNP was snubbed, it and the BPF being promised a place in the new government, and after a few days of angry rioting they were both banned, hunted down and destroyed. The opposition parties also cried out against the invasion - they were not banned, but from then on, elections were practically rigged, with gerrymandering, voter intimidation and suppression being practiced to elect the Labour Party every time, though the opposition occasionally came close. Of course, there were mass protests against FulTec and Europe, but the passage of the Freedom of Expression Act of 2005 and liberal application of previous anti-terror laws soon brutally put a stop to that after a few months, and the island fell silent. Similar events occurred in Ireland, with the previously neutral nation falling under the pressure of intimidation and turning into a controlled democracy. The once great Empire had fallen and had finally, after centuries, been invaded by a foreign army, and the sun had permanently set and blanketed the Isles in night.

With the UK done, the Federation set their sights on the Nordic Union, which was a much weaker target. FulTec also had members there, and Operation Wolf was drafted quicker, consisting of only Confrontation and De-Escalation. A week following the fall of Britain, the FEN surrounded the Union and threatened surrender or invasion. The Union had been preparing for an invasion for months, but against the industrial might of Europe, despite food advantages, preparation was simply futile. The Union still refused, hoping to last out long enough to get a good deal with the Federation, but the following day Gothenburg was bombed relentlessly and European troops ransacked the city. Stockholm was also bombed, and with the nation at risk of full invasion, the government made the difficult decision to unconditionally surrender, hoping to at least keep some of their independence. The Federation was surprisingly lenient on the Union, fearing revolt there and liking it’s lack of resistance, they decided to have little influence on the government unlike the UK. All economic demands were accepted, including the destruction of anti-monopoly laws, and allowing FulTec to operate freely, but the only change in the political system was the suppression of anti-European and FulTec discourse, and government and all major parties would not challenge the changes made. Trade would also be redirected purely to the Federation and it would leave NAFTA (following the UK), officially abolishing the agreement. The Union was also given quotas of food to transport to the Federation due to it’s large production, unlike the UK. Despite getting off lightly, retaining it’s liberal democracy, massive protests took place, and the agreement would the haunt the Nordic government until it’s fall. It was still made a puppet, like the UK, it was shackled economically and politically to the Federation and would struggle to break out.

The invasion and occupation of Britain and Scandinavia is commonly termed as the beginning of “Neo-Colonialism” in the Western World by the remaining scholars and some politicians, with the Federation treating these nations purely as food sources. In this new world, food was something to fight for, and these developments showed how horrifyingly powerful the foodstuffs corporations had gotten, to the point where they were directing the conquests of other nations themselves. Western Europe had fallen to the Federation, yet only out of desperation was the Federation conducting these conquests, as more and more of it’s land was becoming uninhabitable. To ensure the nation survived it was forced to endlessly expand and travel north like a parasite until it finally ran out of blood to feast on.

---

https://youtu.be/2flpdqGfAsw?si=gvqKfQoVlnxZWdKm 

A Fracturing World: The Decaying Transatlantic relationship in the 90s and early 00s, and the fall of NATO

By all accounts, the Federation and the United States were very similar nations. They were both federal, had left-wing socialist-in-all-but-name governments, and shared common enemies in the forms of China (since the 90s) and the USSR. However, this new world was not one for cooperation, but it was dog-eat-dog, every man for himself, and this philosophy, alongside many other small causes that added up, would show the end of relations across the Atlantic and the fracturing of the West into numerous pieces.

Both Food, Inc and FulTec needed most of all land - mainly for farms but also for factories and anything else necessary to produce their foodstuffs. Both countries did have plenty of land, moreso the US, but what drove these corporations was the age-old ideal of “growth, growth, growth” and so they began looking abroad for it. FulTec was operating abroad earlier than Food, Inc in the late 90s as the Federation was experiencing a growing land shortage, opening plantations in Northern and Southern Europe. Spying the large, unused tracts of land in the USA, they began to open them there, which drew criticism from Food, Inc and the American government. The idea of foreign companies operating on their land was reprehensible to the protectionist Graves administration, and also to Food, Inc who needed more land. The administration was also fearful of them using their influence to spy on the US - at this point, this was not necessarily a legitimate concern, but the end of globalisation and isolationist tendencies of the new governments created suspicion in the populaces of the rest of the world. Due to all this, Food, Inc would retaliate and open their own facilities in the Federation in 1996.

The move elicited similar responses from the Federation, which was worried about their land crisis, and they took action, drafting laws to harm foreign companies and American products in retaliation. The United States was angered, and in a speech in May 1996, President Graves threatened 100% tariffs on European products unless the new laws were revoked. The Federation subsequently threatened 150% and after a rapid, terrifying climbup, a deal was agreed in Ottawa that removed the tariffs, placed minor restrictions on the corporations operations in the other continent, and promised further debate on the topic later, which never occurred. The deal reduced tensions in the short term and prevented the early destruction of NATO and the Transatlantic economies, but in the longer term, suspicions grew and tensions flamed up again. Unproven but not unlikely rumours of spying from both sides developed and protestors marched against Food, Inc and FulTec in both nations. The Transatlantic relationship had been permanently damaged by the tariff war and would never return to it’s full strength, despite attempts to improve relations by the Smith Administration. It is thought by many that even if there was no conflict between Food, Inc and FulTec and if the events of May 1996 didn’t occur, the isolationism of the United States and the authoritarianism of the Federation would have led to a split anyways. The death of globalisation had torn the Atlantic too far apart for them to meet again.

To help deflate tensions, negotiations started in 2000 for an agreement between the two nations relating to foodstuffs corporations to solve the issue once and for all. Repeated meetings failed to solve anything and in 2002 it was decided by both sides that Food, Inc and FulTec should simply not be allowed to operate respectively in Europe and in North America. Both corporations were heavily resistant, with FulTec attempting to stage a rebellion within the government to stop this, being the one likely to lose the most. Food, Inc Corp also protested heavily within the US government, but both were pacified with heavy subsidies to make up for the lost land. The corporations were upset not only at the loss of land, but also their prestige, being forced to do something by the government, but in the end the governments had the real power, and so on the 23rd of August 2002, the London Agreement of 2002 was signed, and the Federation and States would be one step further away from each other. The Agreement would reduce tensions, yes, but an unaccounted for side effect was that the United States would have less of a motive to intervene in the European continent if things got bloody, and both nations would slide further into isolationism, driving forward the collapse of NATO ever faster. 

The alliance was simply too fragile to hold through the 90s and 00s, with the foodstuff conflicts causing great tensions between the US and the Federation. The participants of NATO cared little for the alliance, not believing it would help them survive a Soviet attack, and preferring to focus more on their internal issues instead of some country nobody cared about. This was the same for the people too - in all countries, aside from the Nordic ones, support for NATO was declining throughout the 90s as it was thought money was being wasted on it, alongside the increase in internal conflict within the organisation making it look dead already.

The alliance was further damaged with the 1997 Channel Crisis, highlighting the tenuous state of UK-Federation relations. The UK was already becoming more NATO-skeptic as well, with the governing Labour Party claiming the alliance was “useless” following the Channel Crisis, and repeatedly threatening to leave the organisation between the crisis and Red Summer, though never following through. Turkey left in 2001 following a diplomatic conflict with Greece over warships in the Aegean, though the alliance did gain a new member in the form of the Nordic Union the previous year. Conflict with Europe, however, soured the relationship almost immediately. It seemed that even the Federation believed NATO was dead.

The Red Summer and invasion of West Berlin was the killing blow for the alliance, demonstrating clearly the Federation was unreliable and that Article 5 would not be followed through. The Nordic Union, worried about a European invasion and the surging far-left and right, held a referendum in 2004 on the issue, just four years after it joined. 66% of people voted to leave, and with this resounding mandate they did just that. Canada also left the same year - relations between it and the United States had plunged in the 90s, with President Graves placing tariffs and providing pressure on the nation to export it’s food, worrying them an invasion was imminent. The right-wing National Party would win resoundingly in 2004, and promised to leave NATO and build a border wall immediately following the election. And they did just that.

NATO now only contained three nations - the United States, European Federation, and the United Kingdom. The war between the UK and the Federation in early 2005 resulted in the UK leaving, as the USA did nothing except write yet another strongly worded statement in response to the conflict. The alliance was officially dead, as the Federation also left following, and the United States was the only member, making it completely useless and cease to exist. A New World Order was put in it’s place - one where nations would fight others for survival instead of cooperating, one where nations would apply tariffs and build walls instead of trading, one where international law was nonexistent and the mad kings of Chaos and Violence reigned through the dying world.

[1] Some notes on Athens for worldbuilding. Suburbanisation increased incredibly rapidly during the 70s and 80s, expanding further south beyond Glyfada and the north. Infrastructure was expanded but not fast enough and many houses were built shoddily and at a great fire risk, which became very dangerous in the 90s as Athens burned up. As the centre in the 80s and 90s due to the suburbanisation became cheaper, and as fires were common in them, people fled from the suburbs, with many of the outer ones becoming neglected, empty and as shelter for the many homeless or just burning to the ground.
[2] The junta in 1972 was split on whether to follow the fellow European countries in embracing globalisation or not, and large protests and riots alongside broke the back of the junta, who agreed that year to hold free elections.
[3] By the 2000s, the area was already practically leftist territory, as militias controlled most local activity and the government could not be bothered and didn’t have the funds to do anything about it.
[4] Though it may be incorrect I refer to “Scandinavia” and the “Nordic countries” in this as Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark. Iceland does its own things and will be briefly covered in Section 3.
[5] Here is a summary of the major political parties in Sweden and Norway and their political leanings and views on the Federation (in rough order of support):
Norway
Labour: centre-left, pro-Union
Progress: right-wing to far-right, anti-Union
Socialist-Green: left-wing, sort of anti-Union
Centre: centre, pro-Union (to counter the Federation)
Red Alliance: far-left, anti-Union
Conservative Alliance (merger of Conservatives, Liberals, Christian Dem.): centre-right, sort of pro-Union
Sweden
Social Democrats: centre-left, pro-Union
Left: left-wing to far-left, anti-Union
Moderates: centre-right, sort of pro-Union
Swedish Democrats: right-wing to far-right, anti-Union
Agrarian: big tent, not very bothered
Liberal People’s: centre-right, pro-Union
Christian Democrats: centre-right to right-wing, anti-Union
(I’m no expert on Norwegian or Swedish 90s politics so expect this to be a bit inaccurate for some. Assume all the changes changed the parties quite a lot)
[6] The system created following the 1987 British Healthcare Act was not a fully American-style privatised service (what the Conservatives aimed to achieve later), but relegated public healthcare to a secondary option for urgent care, with private care growing rapidly and beginning to dominate before the Sinai War. However, as a result, the quality of the NHS crumbled as investment was redirected to benefits to private companies or other areas.
Before the 1988 Crash people were generally able to afford private healthcare, however this was reversed following and massive protests emerged over the privatisation, becoming immensely unpopular. The Labour Party promised to revoke the Act in their manifesto and did that a few months following the election.
[7] As in other cities across the world, London during the 90s saw population flight from the outer suburbs to the central boroughs, perhaps accelerated by the presence of the Underground and buses. This led to mass overcrowding in the central boroughs, with many ugly flats and extensions being built to combat this, by this point London was increasingly resembling its Victorian era.
The Tube is still operational up until the 2000s but after 1988 becomes extortionately expensive and only usable by the upper middle class. Many of the extensions made in the 70s and 80s (such as the late 80s Jubilee and Bakerloo Chene extensions) are cut back and only major lines such as the Central and Northern are kept operational, and only in the city centre.
[8] The 1977-1989 neoliberal Conservative government (there were Conservative PMs since 1970 but of a different faction) is meant to sort of be a mix of Blair and a much more radical Thatcher for context.
[9] Firearms in Britain were completely banned following the Croydon Massacre in 1991 in which 26 were killed in a riot in the town centre.
[10] A summary of the major British political parties during the 90s for reference and worldbuilding:
Labour Party: economically left-wing, socially centre-right. The dominant party in new British politics, holding just under 400 seats following the 1999 election despite unpopularity due to the divided opposition. Incredibly strong in the north, mainly in socially conservative industrial cities and the north-east. Also maintains an iron grip on Wales and central Scotland, and big city centres, although, especially in London, they are slowly going to the Greens.
Their 90s government is economically reminiscent of OTL early 80s Labour, however the party has abandoned much of its social liberalism to appeal to the socially conservative north to stop the BNP. They have gained many authoritarian tendencies throughout their tenure as a result of all the violence and that may be put to the test at some point. Most socially liberal members have left to the Greens.
Liberal Party: economically centre to centre-left, socially centre-left to left-wing. Was able to appeal to many southern, suburban Conservative voters in 1989 to wreck the party there and become the Official Opposition. Strong in much of the liberal south and parts of London primarily, as well as some areas in the north. Holds social liberalism (the ideology) as its official stance.
Much of it’s recent appeal has been in response to the authoritarianism and social conservatism of the Labour Party, promising a repeal of anti-immigration laws and “draconian” crime and policing laws. Additionally it maintains an environmentalist stance, promising massive subsidies to renewable energy and a slow rollback of coal, however, with the economic crisis and powerful trade unions everyone knows this is a pipe dream (which is why the party is anti-union).
Conservative Party: economically centre-right to right-wing, socially centre-left to right-wing. A shadow of their former self following the election of 1989. Kept their strength in a few rural areas and parts of the East of England, though their hold there is quickly going to the BNP. The old neoliberal faction is ITTL a mix of a more radical Thatcher and Blair, following the defeat the Thatcherist element is toned town heavily.
The party is split between liberal and nationalist factions who bitterly fight each other. The liberal faction is a slightly more left-wing version of the old neoliberals and wants a union with the Liberal Party, whereas the hard-right nationalist faction wants to use anti-immigration sentiment (despite being seen as the party causing it) to their advantage and win back BNP voters. The liberals win out after the heavy 1999 defeat for them and soon after the Liberal Conservative Party is formed.
British National Party: economically centre-left to centre-right, socially far-right. Was incredibly minor following the 1988 crash, but heavily rose due to anti-austerity and anti-immigration sentiment following. Strong primarily in the East of England and in left-behind rural areas, but also in city centres by white families scared of the race riots.
Runs mainly off anti-immigration sentiment, with half of it’s 1994 manifesto being dedicated to the issue. It promises mass deportations and holding refugees in giant camps away from civilisation. Also has a strong anti-austerity focus and a “law and order” focus like Labour has, wanting to make the BPF equal to the police and a new Gestapo-like force. They are constantly criticised for their unrealistic policy that would bankrupt the country and them literally being neo-Nazis, but this likely actually gains them votes as more vote for them as an anti-establishment choice.
Green Party: economically left-wing to far-left, socially left-wing. Gained new support following acceleration of climate crisis and gained strength in rural areas for campaigning against nuclear developments. Has strength in many rural areas (though not enough to gain many seats there) and more recently in big cities, including East London where they gained many seats in 1999, additionally in flooded parts of the East of England. Still minor but is only set to grow in the future.
The party is seen as a left-wing alternative to Labour who many grew disillusioned with especially following the “sickening offspring” speech, causing many to move to it. It lacks strength as many consider it to be in “fantasyland” with its anti-nuclear policies and pacifist ones such as nuclear disarmament (which many in Labour considered at one point), however many that still remember TMI remain anti-nuclear and the cost of wind and solar is actually declining. Often it is seen as a protest vote against Labour and in constituencies more affected by climate change.
(1999 manifestos for those parties coming at some point guys)
[11] For instance, radar and sonar were often inaccurate and failed, weapons struggled to fire and corrosion and rust led to many accidents. As a result, few ships were deployed in naval battles in the 2000s and they featured little confrontation. By the 2010s naval warfare was mostly non-existent, as maintaining ships for most nations was far too costly and they were generally focused on domestic problems anyways. Only the Nordic Union, United Kingdom, Japan, the Soviet Union, Argentina, and to an extent Poland and the European Federation (mainly FulTec ran) have substantial navies by 2020. Food, Inc also operates a small one.
[12] Devolution was extended to England’s regions (e.g. North West, North East...) in the late 80s, though the local governments were not very powerful.

Section 3: As the Abyss Gazes Back


You feel the warm air collect on your skin. It tastes like long-forgotten pollution and acid rain. Feels like home.


LOADING... LOADING... LOADING...

PLEASE ENTER USERNAME AND PASSWORD
USERNAME: ############
PASSWORD: ######
>CONFIRM

LOADING... LOADING... LOADING...
ACCESS CONFIRMED

VOSSCORP TERMINALS V1.2.4 [1]
LAST SYSTEM UPDATE: 19/6/2024
TERMINAL 019A4, CENTRE, FRANKFURT AM MAIN, GERMANY, EUROFED
MANY THANKS TO OUR SPONSORS AT FULTECTM!
WELCOME, FRIEDRICH RIEDEL!
DATE AND TIME: 21/4/2116 13:37
WEATHER:
MEASURING SYSTEMS NONFUNCTIONAL
HIGH/LOW TEMP: ##/## C
UV INDEX: ##
AIR POLLUTION INDEX: ##
DISASTER RISK INDEX: ## [2]
HEAT RISK INDEX: ##

WHAT DO YOU WISH TO ACCESS?
SEARCH [...                 ]

Searching “European Federation Historical Records 2006-2026”...
53 results found

EFFECTS OF AMOC COLLAPSE 2006 ON EUROPEAN AND GLOBAL CLIMATE - 25/9/2009
EVACUATION AND INTERNAL MIGRATION ACT FULL TEXT OFFICIAL - 11/7/2006
MEMOIRS FROM MADRID - 30/11/2010
FULTEC FOODSTUFFS DEPT. PRODUCT SALES 2003-2027 - LAST UPDATED 10/4/2027
REPORT FROM ATTEMPTED COUP OF 2015 - 15/10/2015
URGENT SECURITY REPORT FROM BRITISH ISLES 23/2/2024 - 23/2/2024
...
>MY THOUGHTS AND FEELINGS -K.RIEDEL - LAST UPDATED 11/1/2018

WARNING: Are you sure you intend on opening this data, Mr. Riedel? Security clearance is Lv. 5 or higher.
>Yes No
The Department wishes you the best of luck, Mr. Riedel. Your ancestor sends his regards.

LOADING DATA... LOADING DATA...
OPENING DATA... OPENING DATA...

---

“He who fights with monsters should look to it that he himself does not become a monster. And if you gaze long into an abyss, the abyss also gazes into you.”
-Friedrich Nietzsche, 1886 [3]

---

11/01/2018
MIDDAY
GOSLAR, GERMANY, EURO. FEDERATION

Old, frail, dying Klaus Riedel was lying down in a white, luxurious bed, covered in a blanket, alone in a small room with a desk, two sets of drawers and an empty closet. The bed was right by the window - he stared, gazing out of it to the town below, his eyes showing only emptiness inside. Occasionally, an aide would come check on him for a few minutes; to check his heart rate, blood pressure, and for other vital signs. Not that there was any point. If he wished, he could simply shoo the aide away and make her never come to check on him again. But Klaus didn’t mind the company - not even he would like spending days and weeks alone, with no human interaction. It was a nice break from the routine.

It was just a few months ago that Klaus, weakening and heavily coughing, had received his diagnosis in a private hospital in Frankfurt, near FulTec’s old headquarters. “Aggressive lung cancer,” the doctor said, or at least something along the lines of it, his memory was constantly failing him. “Untreatable. The best we can do is prolong it. And we’re not even sure we can do that.” The doctor spoke in a neutral tone, without any hint of a bias, but Riedel could have sworn there was some mocking undertone behind his voice. Paranoia, perhaps. Or something deeper. Not that it mattered, regardless. His days were numbered, anyway.

The people, the bloodless psychopaths at FulTec, they didn’t like him, he was well aware of that. He had been forced out (or “retired”, as the press called it) some years back, and was only made an observer in the corporation’s plans. He watched helplessly as they approved Project Unthinkable five years prior, despite his voracious moral and scientific objections. That was likely the final straw. And the Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 16, when the world burned up, seemed to validate their beliefs, as they shipped out FulTec Plenty, their latest product, en masse to the cities of Europe. Klaus, and the remaining scientists with a brain and a conscience, knew better, they knew that Project Unthinkable was unsustainable, and that it would fail very quickly, but that did not matter to the new execs. The goal was profit, it had always been, even when he himself was the CEO, with all the bloodshed and pain and suffering he had inflicted on the people of Greece, of Britain, of Scandinavia, of his home of Germany, and Europe itself. It was his karma, it had come back to bite him and kill him and leave him here alone and helpless, in his dying hometown.

Goslar had always been a treasured place for Klaus since his birth and childhood there, he had adored the greenery, the palace, the architecture there. Now all of that was gone, the forests burned and cut down to leave blank waste in their midst, the palace and architecture and monuments crumbling and being destroyed by the pollution from nearby superfactories. All he could see outside his window was smog, thick smoke impeding his view, he could hardly see his hometown below. Goslar was a rural town, hosting around 10,000 at this time. The evil, cruel, unspeakable minds of FulTec had drawn up plans, they needed bodies, people for Plenty, and the supply of criminals and people sent to death would not suffice, FulTec needed farm workers, after all. No, the vast majority had fled to the cities for work anyway, places like here were emptying, old, desolate these years. Who would notice if old, small towns like here went missing anyways?

Klaus had tried to fight his hardest against them, but he was too weak, cancer-ridden, and the elite laughed at him as he spoke weakly from a wheelchair, his frail voice carrying just a few metres, laughing maniacally, or were they crying? Were tears brewing behind these faces of steel, those empty expressions, had they gone insane or empty inside, convincing themselves these were the sacrifices they had to make for the security of the Federation. Klaus could not read anything anymore, everyone around them had confusing faces, expressions of dread, despair, hopelessness, insanity, everyone had gone insane in this deeply rotten world. He could never find it in himself to forgive them, never, but his mind had lost all capacity for anger, or hatred, or any emotion at all. He felt utterly empty as he stared at the smoke, ancient buildings barely visible behind it. One day, they may not be visible at all. Maybe FulTec had deliberately placed these factories there, to torment him in his last days of life.

The aide came into the room, handing him his tray of lunch, thankfully not any of FulTec’s products, at least they had the decency to do that. In his heart, he knew he deserved it, he deserved to be stuffed and forcefed with as much FulTec Plenty as possible, as he chewed on the stale food he could have sworn he felt the crunch of human flesh beneath his teeth. All of it, all of this was his fault, he knew, he had risen this company from the dead, he had destroyed all his competitors and planted the same factories which were destroying his home now, countless and innumerable lives were ruined and extinguished as a result of him and people like him, with the same mindsets, thoughts and ideas. He had destroyed his hometown, left all the good people there to be killed and cannibalised unknowingly by his fellow Germans. His final thoughts dissolved in the sickening heat as his last breaths echoed across the room.

Later that day, his passing was reported by his aide to her superiors. His death was unreported to the populace, only known to the higher-ups, and his body was taken to be processed and sold in a package of FulTec Plenty, a “fitting reward”, said the new CEO. And perhaps it was, for the Man who Destroyed Europe.

---

Europe was in a race against fate itself.

The continent was warming at an alarming rate, faster than any area on Earth aside the Arctic. The Sahara had extended into North Africa by the 2000s, and was quickly spreading across the Mediterranean, into Iberia and Sicily and beyond. Chronic megadroughts rocked Southern Europe and continued indefinitely, with food and water becoming a luxury to many, fuelling riots and chaos like the Federation had never seen. Normal life broke down as temperatures rose to the point of making summers unliveable, and in a matter of years, whole cities became abandoned as scores of people left for cooler pastures or just died in the streets, as often happened to the elderly. Southern Europe was left to the hands of terrorist groups and crime gangs, who ruled the dying cities with iron fists until even they could no longer survive.

However, even life up north wasn’t much better. Internal refugees flooded the cities and often were crammed into hastily-built, flammable housing which tended to catch fire during the summer. Speaking of summer, massive heatwaves had become a yearly occurrence, burning down swathes of forest until there was nothing left. Wildfire smoke blanketed cities and in many, face masks became mandatory and stay-at-home orders were common, not that they did much. Respiratory illnesses became the latest health concern and cases, which in the summer had become common on the level of the regular flu, were simply ignored by the few remaining hospitals which were already going bankrupt and stretching the nationalised health service to its limits. Fires were even taking place in big cities, where many newer buildings for refugees were constructed without adherence to safety codes, and many simply burned to the ground, killing many and forcing them onto the crowded streets and into the dark alleys. They were becoming homes for Europe’s countless number of homeless, which the government soon stopped bothering to record. Even for people lucky enough to live in a dwelling, they still weren’t built for the immense heatwaves that had become the new normal and often became incredibly hot in summer. Air conditioning had not reached Northern Europe from America, and even over there was a luxury, with electricity bills becoming unaffordable. Food was also being affected - whatever semi-natural food that still existed was only available in the “winter” months, and during the summer, only FulTec’s products were available.

Heatwaves were not the only climate event that the Federation had to deal with. Storms and flooding were becoming far more commonplace, with Germany in particular often being struck by major floods that killed hundreds. The Benelux and France also suffered from similar events. The Netherlands in particular was most at risk, with massive storms causing ever greater damage to towns, and more importantly, the barriers holding the nation together. The country was a ticking time bomb for the Federation, everyone knowing its flooding was inevitable, but the cost of moving everyone and everything, especially all the agriculture there, was far too much for the Federation to commit to, despite the even greater costs of waiting the issue out.

The Federation was also heavily changing socially as well, as the aftermath of the Crackdown had created a culture of fear among the people. The Local Protection Units were ruthless and bound to no law, and regularly raided the homes of so-called “dissidents”. Horrific rumours of torture prefiltered by the government were commonplace among newspapers and well-known by the people, and so the LPUs were heavily feared. People were pressured to report others they thought were “dissidents” for a reward (often a portion of natural food), who were usually innocent of any crime, and the LPUs quickly turned into a Gestapo-like system, creating an environment similar to that of Nazi Germany. Whether it was ever intentional or not is unknown. Whatever media remained was also broadcasting purely government propaganda. The newspapers (which were generally shared between the poor due to their obscene price) were still relatively reliable for the little foreign news they had, but domestic stories were screened by the government and incredibly distorted. Radio had resurged following a government effort to have one in most homes and their cheaper prices, but the few stations were also government-run, and so were considered unreliable. Television was hardly used due to requiring lots of electricity, but the few channels there were, like the radio channels, government-run. [4] Everyone living had seen a world without brutal authoritarianism and most had seen a world without the Federation, making propaganda ineffective to most. FulTec’s and the government’s hopes were that the younger generation and the one yet to be born would buy into it more for that reason.


Economically, things were practically in ruins. FulTec was the Federation’s biggest private employer (second to the federal government), boasting close to 20% and an ever-increasing amount of jobs. They all had horrendous working conditions, especially so after 2003. Lots of the time they hired from the unemployed as they would be more desperate and their jobs generally had no skill requirements. The trade unions had stopped pay and working conditions from getting too bad, being the main force fighting against FulTec, but their presence and power had collapsed following the Crackdown and passage of the Trade Union Act of 2003. Hardly any new workers bothered to join them, and they were collapsing like dominoes. The remaining jobs generally had abysmal pay, 30-40% being minimum wage, and almost non-existent safety measures and miserable conditions. The people hated seeing their pay being gutted for almost two decades, but with high unemployment, the employed were seen as lucky and so people would take any job they could get, giving employers the excuse to suppress wages. The waves of internal refugees also worsened the issue and increased job competition.


Politically, the Socialists were dominant, winning large majorities every election. The only parliamentary opposition were the Greens, the liberal ALDE and conservative EPP. The Greens were, to put it mildly, batshit insane, proposing incredibly radical and inhumane population control measures such as a zero birth policy and voluntary euthanasia (which would soon shift into the mainstream) and actions such as deindustrialisation to “save the climate”. The party in reality used to be much more moderate, however the dramatic worsening of the climate crisis radicalised them, and FulTec wished to keep a radical fringe opposition to the PES. ALDE and more reluctantly the EPP mainly campaigned against the authoritarian “crackdown laws”, their economic positions being similar to the PES by this point, if not slightly more right wing. With their positions getting ever more similar, in 2011 they decided to merge into the Democratic Alliance. FulTec wanted some form of an opposition to maintain the illusion of a legitimate democracy, and so the opposition struggled to make inroads. The media blasted PES propaganda come election time and immense voter suppression, intimidation, voter apathy and possibly some rigging called the elections for the Socialists every time. The opposition began to believe nothing would ever change, and so the drive in them faded, and FulTec remained utterly dominant.


The Federation was facing crisis, with climate disasters reaching biblical proportions and living conditions worsening each year. It was in these conditions that this shell of a nation trudged through rivers of blood, pain and despair to reach the end, as the nation and the world collapsed around it.

---

A World Altered: The aftereffects of the collapse of the AMOC in 2006


A map of the current, for reference.

Across the whole world, climate was breaking down. Many tipping points, such as the collapse of the Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheets, as well as the burning of the Amazon Rainforest [5], had already been reached, causing irreversible and catastrophic changes across the world. Despite scientists endlessly warning people and governments about the consequences, and the emissions reductions due to GDP loss, global inertia was too strong and the economy too fucked to create any meaningful change, and temperatures soared unstoppably higher. Perhaps the biggest one of all, the one that created the most change despite being invisible to the world was the collapse of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, or the AMOC.

The AMOC is the Atlantic’s main ocean current system, transporting 

---

Paradise Lost: Desertification in the Iberian Peninsula and the passage of the Internal Migration and Security Act of 2006


An emergency heat warning broadcasted across all TVs in Spain, on an unknown day in July 2007. The alerts are also broadcasted by giant sirens and radios across cities, and by home radios too.

---

[1] The company Vosscorp (created by FulTec’s founder) worked throughout the 2000s and 2010s in basic electronics and computer systems for the European government. In the 2020s the government aimed to record and preserve as much data as they could in preparation for the inevitable global collapse, so Vosscorp built terminals across the Federation to store various data (e.g. papers, journals, figures) for future survivors (ideally FulTec and govt. elites).
[2] The often unreliable Disaster Risk Index was developed in Europe in 2008 following the previous years’ many climate disasters. It combines the local risk of flood, heavy wind, drought and other disasters to create a measure for how “safe” the area is. The index was adopted across the Federation to limited affect as critics say the index is too generalised and relies on unreliable measurements.
The Heat Risk Index is used in most countries (with varying methodologies) and measures the risk of lethal heat, which can come by simply incredibly high temperatures (e.g. what’s constantly measured in 2020s Iberia ITTL and the Sahara OTL) or “wet bulb temperatures”, where a combination of high heat and humidity prevents sweating from occurring and has lethal effects on people.
[3] I feel this quote fits much more into Section 1 as the Federal Government became the same as what it was opposing. As the Federation looks into the hellish future, all the nightmarish projections ahead of it, it does what it believe it must do to survive. And most of the time, they are not the right things to do (And yes, Friedrich Riedel having the same first name was coincidence and I only realised it later).
[4] Newspapers only consist of a few pages in the 2000s to save costs. Most of it is for domestic news, which is mainly FulTec related, political, or covering climate change and natural disasters (the European government does make an effort to educate the people as much about it as possible). There is a small section for foreign news. The economic situation has led to the entertainment, lifestyle and other related sections being defunct, so newspapers are quite limited in content.
On the radio, there is a weather station, a music station, and a few government-run news and informative channels. To replace the decline of traditional schooling, an educational one was set up in 2005, though that mainly teaches labour and more traditional skills. The news channel mainly covers domestic news as foreign news, with the death of globalisation, is very limited. There was formerly a separate channel for it but it was merged in 2004.
Television is even more limited with a channel for weather (+climate) and a channel for news only. They both, however, run almost 24/7.
Media in general has shrunk dramatically since 2003 as following the Red Summer and Crackdown the government had an opportunity to target it to cut costs.
[5] By 2000 the vast majority of the rainforest had already been cut down, but the remainder of it burned down in a colossal fire in July 2004, blanketing lots of the world in wildfire smoke.

Plans:
Section 3 - As The Abyss Gazes Back
-Europe in the late 2000s and 2010s - non-political, focuses on effects of climate change, development of European foodstuffs, struggle of Europe to survive
Climate change effects, evacuations
-AMOC collapses around the late-2000s, causes climate chaos across the world (do more research!) 
-Netherlands floods in 2007, barriers break in especially rainy year and Amsterdam, the Hague, Rotterdam flooded. Evacuation efforts take place and controversially, people are distributed around the country, threatening to damage the Dutch identity
-Desertification hitting Iberia - in 2006 Federation passes Internal Migration and Security Act, which gives government permission to declare areas “abandoned” and evacuate citizens out, preferably to the rest of their own state, but if that can’t happen (e.g. 2007 Netherlands), evacuate them across the Federation. Giant refugee camps built, which are very low quality. The act is first used in 2006 to evacuate most of the south of Spain. In 2008 Lisbon is controversially evacuated after heatwave and lots of political violence and in 2010 Madrid, then in 2012 Barcelona and all of Iberia are abandoned due to unrest and desertification. Some think evacuation is unnecessary.
-In 2008 Sicily is evacuated. In 2017 lots of the south of Italy also is. Mafia (which the Federation has been cooperating with for a while) takes over many functions in that area
-The south of France remains not evacuated though becomes more and more uninhabited until 2021, when Marseilles completely burns to the ground (yes, completely) and provisions are put in place. Some people still live there but they are few and most emigrate.
-Rome faces brutal riots in Second Great Heatwave following immense water scarcity, Catholic extremist groups there ally with factions in Vatican and launch armed revolt in city (2024). Rome descends into anarchy following which spreads across much of North Italy. Mafia and religious extremists take over lots of it
Political aftermath of 2003
-90% of trade unions collapsed by 2010, remaining ones merged into a few big unions similar to the USA, called the European Workers’ Collective.
-The economic crisis caused by climate change impacts, spiralling budget deficits caused by LPUs and economic decline caused by FulTec, forces immense budget cuts in 2009, destroying healthcare completely alongside education. The cuts get worse through the years
-Politically PES is dominant and wins large majorities every election, with Democrats and Greens as minor opposition. Greens grow following nuclear incidents (2014 election)
-LPUs become more and more powerful and drain federal budget over time. Federal government gets worried about it. They discover Project Unthinkable in 2015 and decide to keep it hidden and launch a revolt. They do that in the summer during the Great Heatwave, but an informer tells the gov and they wipe out the LPU head during the night, creating a new organisation more connected to the gov
-Following 2015 Great Heatwave, officials become worried voters will try to vote out gov in 2019, FulTec decides to take over gov incase of revolt, and does that in 2017, killing major officials and rigging elections, controlling Fed from shadows
Population control, foodstuffs
-post-2003, agriculture is failing in Europe - FulTec must take advantage of other things to make food. Copies Food, Inc and uses jellyfish blooms, but struggles with that and lacks funds. Food, Inc is much richer and more talented than FulTec is after 2003 - Europe is put on the brink
-January 2009 - FulTec Natural - an insect and roach-based foodstuff, is first sold. It is very popular and sells out quickly, and becomes the main foodstuff sold in Europe
-One-Child Policy introduced in 2010 to curb overpopulation. However, it’s hard to enforce, and families with second children often hid them at their homes or in secret, horrific “baby shelters” where they are hidden from the authorities (use China’s OCP as template)
-In 2013, as the food crisis gets closer and closer, the Federation begins “Project Unthinkable” (name unrelated to the Operation) - recycling human flesh as food. Firstly it is used on convicts, and is sold as FulTec Plenty, an alternative to Natural. It doesn’t reach the same heights as Natural, however, until 2015 and 16, where Natural is in very short supply and FulTec Plenty is mass produced
-Eventually deaths are in short supply as too many people need it - in early 2018, plan is agreed to wipe out rural areas and use their bodies. Additionally, squads are sent out to internal refugees and families are taken at random
Foreign affairs
-UK becomes increasingly close to the Federation to survive. In 2014, Southampton Agreement is signed, which ties the UK even closer to Europe, essentially making it a puppet
-Federation invades Iceland in 2013. Due to its relatively colder temperatures, it becomes a summer home for lots of the elite. With FulTec seeing record profits, it buys off Iceland from Europe in 2014 and turns it into a summer home for the elite, building mansions there, destroying the local economy and replacing it with itself. Almost everyone in Iceland gets employed by FulTec. Would turn out to be a mistake as the cost was immense and impacted FulTec heavily in the Great Heatwave, contributing to FulTec mass adopting Plenty afterwards
-Switzerland becomes a dominant party democracy then an autocracy during 2000s to protect itself. In 2010s Europe becomes belligerent to it for its water supplies. Switzerland is running out of stored food and so they try make an agreement with Federation, signed in 2015, to exchange food and water with each other. Europe also doesn’t have enough food tho and so they modify the agreement later to threaten Switzerland and benefit them more
Vatican City and religion
-PES is secular, tolerates Vatican City and religion. Christianity is dominant and Islam and later Judaism are discriminated against and suppressed by the people due to racism
-Following Crackdown Vatican speaks out against it but is quickly silenced by the Federation. No one is killed to avoid creating martyrs but anti-government and FulTec speech is suppressed
-Dissent grows following and Popes turn more extremist
Other major events
-In 2011 a nuclear reactor in France just south of Luxembourg goes critical and explodes due to rushed designing and construction and massive corruption and incompetence, not going as bad as Three Mile Island but worse than Chernobyl and lots of the surrounding area suffers from radiation poisoning. It’s too much effort to evacuate people that are there so the government just lets it be. Following this the Federation decides to solely focus on coal as nuclear is too risky.
2024-2026 - The Federation’s downfall
-2024-25 - Second Great Heatwave hits, even worse than the first and makes large areas of the world uninhabitable (incl. lots of the USA). Leads to mass unrest in Europe and the beginning of revolution
-2024 - British Revolution - reaction to a fire and a massacre in Birmingham leads to revolution across the country, British Civil War begins following. Federation gets lots of its food from Britain and so suffers
-At the same time, the same thing happens in Ireland. The military coups the Nordic Union after unrest quickly builds and kicks out the European Union. Event is called the “European Spring”
-Federation is close to collapse - expands range of people used for Plenty. Takes all internal refugees and sweep less-populated areas, and take people at random in densely-populated, poor areas in cities
-It is a totalitarian state by this point despite the mass chaos, comparable even to the USSR and China. However, despite the harsh punishments, crime is basically unpoliced and most processed for Plenty are innocent. It has truly become “anarcho-totalitarian”
-Plans are made for elites to flee to Greenland, where surveys are being conducted as the ice melts. Antarctica is considered as a secondary option
-End: Someone, breaking and entering into a factory, finds out something horrific...
“FULTEC L'ABONDANCE C'EST LES GENS !”
Part 2-3
A Fractured World: The Cost of Civilization
Section 1: The End of the Cold War (1969-1988)

Excerpt from “The Lord of Moscow: The Life of Sergei Savateev”, by Sindre Vølstad, Neu Stockholm Press, 956 ASJ

https://youtu.be/pO6q_mFjEUg?si=sppliPk6F6FwlKCi 

The death of Chairman Mao sent ripples through the world. 

In places like the United States, the Nixon administration breathed a sigh of relief. In the north, however, General Secretary Anton Agassi was wary of the new regime in the land of Chenism. The Soviet Union rallied the rest of the Second World, taking its place once again as the foremost authority of Communism. 


Brezhnev's motorcade on January 22nd, 1969. He would be assassinated this day. 

The second Sino-Soviet split can be traced back all the way back to January 22nd, 1969, when Leonid Brezhnev was assassinated by an unknown assailant. Early reports claimed it was a disgruntled Soviet soldier, however, a later investigation by the KGB discovered that it was actually an agent of the People’s Republic of China. This finding was released on February 29th, 1972, the day after the Shanghai Accords were signed. 

The assassination had several effects. One, the General Secretary dying during the midst of the Cultural Revolution to the south, and assassinated by an agent of the People’s Republic of China no less, caused the Soviet leadership a great amount of worry. Mao was quickly turning into a second Stalin and this did not bode well - many in the USSR had lived through the horrors of Stalinism, and had decided that a Soviet version of the Cultural Revolution must be avoided at all costs. 

The Politburo went through a few months of infighting, and in June 1969 they came up with their answer - the Supreme Triumvirate of the Soviet Union. The Triumvirate, made up by the Minister of Defense, the General Secretary of the Communist Party, and the Director of the KGB, would share executive power equally. Any major decision made must satisfy two of the three men, and most importantly, if anyone else in the Communist Party felt that they were misusing their power, they could be removed from office, impeached, and barred from holding any office in the future. This was a lingering issue that had been plaguing the Soviet Union ever since the days of Stalin, and one that Khrushchev and Brezhnev had failed to reform. And now, it was being used to prevent another Mao. The First Triumvirate was General Secretary Anton Agassi, Minister of Defense Andrei Grechko, and KGB Director Yuri Andropov. 

Another effect of the assassination was that in Brezhnev’s motorcade, three esteemed Soviet Cosmonauts were killed. These three cosmonauts were the first two Soviet men and first Soviet woman in space, and were treated as national heroes. They were on the way to the unveiling of the USSR’s new Soyuz-8, which was the USSR’s response to the Apollo missions. When it was found that the spacecraft had been sabotaged as well, Grechko proposed the first order of the Triumvirate: the authorization of militarization initiatives for the Soviet Space Program. The Americans had begun to militarize their low-orbit aircraft, after the Lockheed-Douglas merge in 1968. 

The Soviet Union spent the rest of 1969 and 1970 reorganizing their economy, industry, and even the reorganization of their government. With Mao executing his insanity to the south, the Politburo was more than eager to reform to prevent a similar thing from happening (and thus being held responsible). In 1970, the average age of the Politburo was decreased to 49 after Secretary Agassi forcibly retired some of the more elderly members of the Soviet government. They were given nice, comfortable, but humble apartments in Moscow and an early pension, along with vacation homes in the Baltic SSRs. 

Agassi, who had worked his way up through the CPSU from the humble home of an Armenian farmer and an Azerbaijani factory worker, understood how the quality of life was decreasing for the average Soviet citizen. He was celebrated as a “People’s Leader”: he frequently walked the streets and talked with Soviet citizens, asking them about how the Politburo could best represent them. He spoke candidly about the problems the USSR was facing, but he always tied it back to the lack of “Pan-Sovietism” and later on, the Sino-Soviet split. What he did not understand was that other Soviet citizens would discriminate against their fellow workers for being born into different republics of the Soviet Union - they were all sons and daughters of the Motherland, and all had been lifted from the Tsar’s oppressive regime by mighty Lenin. If an Armenian and Azerbaijani could find love, so could a Kazakh and a Turkmen, or a Ukrainian and a Russian. All had been lifted up to the supreme unifying culture of being a Soviet, and in that unifying culture, all tensions melted away. 

This caused some issues in the Central Asian SSRs, initially. A minor uprising in the Kyrgyz SSR was caused when the head of the Kyrgyz Communist Party was forcibly retired by Secretary Agassi, but the Red Army was called in and the unrest fizzled out by 1971. The Tajik SSR experienced a similar period of unrest. Tensions would require Moscow to keep a tight grip on the Turkmens. Efforts to wipe out corruption in the Georgian SSR were also far more than initially projected. 

But in order to enact this vision of a truly unified people, Secretary Agassi knew that he had to increase the standard of living. Racial tensions only existed when the people were unhappy, or so he thought, and so he dedicated 1971 to be the year that the Soviet Union would begin to modernize. No longer would the Soviet Union focus on spreading Communism - that would take care of itself, he would say - instead, at least for the 1970s, the Soviet Union would focus on increasing the standard of living for its Soviet citizens. Not just its Russian citizens, not just its farmers, not just the Kazakhs and the Turkmens, but for all under the Red Flag. This would lead to the Soviet Union supporting leftist movements in Africa and Latin America far less, though they still gave intel and training. 

In Vietnam, the Soviet Union stopped sending more advanced materiel to the VietCong, and instead only trained soldiers and sent small arms. Due to the increased number of American and South Korean troops, the Soviet Union strongly urged Ho Chi Minh to consider South Vietnam a lost cause. The USSR stopped offering intel and tactical advice as well. 

The detente continued peacefully. Many agreements relating to trade and arms limitations continued like in OTL. Secretary Agassi’s policies in combination with recognizing East Germany as an independent state would be the start of the Soviet Union opening up trade with the West and normalizing relations. “One People, Two Systems” was the doctrine of the Triumvirate at the time, as they believed that all were of the Soviet people, even if they didn’t know it yet. The Soviet Union was reshaping itself into being a truly egalitarian dictatorship of the proletariat, and prided itself into being the future of humanity - unlike the insanity that was taking place in China. Despite their best efforts though, the lure of Chenism would be too tantalizing and the idea of Eurocommunism would never catch on until a brief flare up in 2003. 

And then, on September 11th, 1971, Chairman Mao was assassinated. 

For a small period of time, the Soviets quietly celebrated. The Second Stalin was dead, and with it, China would return to a place of normalcy and rationality that befit a communist. Both Secretary Agassi and Minister Grechko were elated, but Director Andropov remained skeptical. Embedded agents, corroborated by satellite photos, showed vast amounts of political elite from Mao’s regime escaping from the People’s Republic of China. They were running everywhere they could - to North Vietnam, to North Korea, to the People’s Republic of Mongolia, and some into the Central Asian SSRs. Secretary Agassi and Minister Grechko remained hopeful until October 1971 when an escaped Chinese official, the leader of the Communist Party in his small town near Nanjing, told them in a top-secret meeting that the new leader of the PRC had betrayed communism. 

Chairman Chen Qiang had started to hijack the Cultural Revolution to suit his own goals, and those goals were relentless industrialization for the sole purpose of capitalist expansion. Already people were being rounded up and executed by the PLA for crimes of being “Maoist loyalists”, in addition to being intellectuals or those who didn’t agree with Chen’s new policies. 

All the effort from 1964-1972 to ease the tensions between China and the USSR vanished once it was discovered that an agent working for Chairman Chen had assassinated Brezhnev, and any desire to renew them evaporated when Chairman Chen Qiang and President Richard Nixon signed the Shanghai Accords. 

The USSR was now bordered by an insane, backwards capitalist country that had betrayed its workers. This cemented the USSR as the sole leader of the communist world, and Secretary Agassi repealed the Brezhnev Policy - only once China was back in the fold could the world revolution continue. The Soviet Union shifted towards a mindset of countering China rather than the West - China was quickly building the capacity to, in Secretary Agassi’s own words, “overrun the entire Earth”. Border skirmishes between the USSR and China led to almost 2000 casualties in 1971 alone. When the KGB arrested people, they began using the excuse of “pro-Chinese sympathies”, or “pro-Chinese mindsets”. 

It was then that Director Andropov proposed what would come to be known as “Monsoon Protocol”, in which the Soviet Union’s embedded agents helped grant the fleeing intelligentsia safe passage into the Soviet Union through North Korea and Mongolia. These members of China’s elite would then be given a safe haven in Moscow[1] and were even offered jobs in the Politburo, however, these Chinese refugees were for the most part never treated the same as the Soviet citizens who took them in. Although the last history books written in 2027 would never admit it, it was these intelligentsia that would save the USSR. 

The Politburo, despite Secretary Agassi’s reforms in the wake of Brezhenv’s assassination, was still set in their ways when it came to industrial and agricultural policy. It was the Chinese Exiles, as they came to be known, that provided a fresh pair of eyes and tales of the inefficiency of Mao’s policies that caused the Soviet Union to make a dramatic shift in its economic, industrial and agricultural policies. In 1972, the USSR began widespread industrialization programs to build massive factories (though not quite on the scale of China’s - at least not yet) throughout the north-west for the sole purpose of manufacturing parts to upgrade existing Stalin-era factories. Soviet and Chinese architects worked together to redesign the USSR’s infrastructure to be far more efficient, and while they retained their brutalist style, they did become notably more opulent. Elevated motorways stretched from Moscow to Leningrad, and 1km tall Worker’s Palaces were built in Kiev, Minsk and Riga. Intricate People’s Universities gave farmers the opportunity to learn how to be a factory worker, leading to a massive increase in education and the creation of a white-collar service industry. Irrigation efforts were reworked to dramatically increase agricultural yield, and were concentrated in the south-east. Lake Baikal was drained for irrigation efforts, beforehand there were many jokes about it constantly catching fire. But until 1975, the Soviet Union kept manufacturing large amounts of weapons. Minister Grechko and Director Andropov both believed that the USSR would soon be invaded, even though the Chinese Exiles universally saw it as unlikely. 


The Soviet Palace of Worker’s Rights and Culture, Moscow. Finished in 1985. 

In 1975, the Soviet Union would ratify their fourth constitution. This new constitution (known historically as the Agassi Constitution) enshrined the Soviet Union as the one true beacon of communism after the fall of China to Chenism. It also solidified the Triumvirate system into the law to prevent another cult of personality like how Stalin or Mao had. This new Constitution, however, still emphasized how the Soviet Law was supreme to the laws of the Republics. Like previous iterations, the citizens were in theory granted freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly and freedom of religion, however there were always many by-laws that prohibited these rights in relation to government opposition and organized religion. After the constitution was ratified, the Politburo also recognized the Chinese Exiles as the sole legal government of China, and not Chen (or Taiwan, for that matter). 

Near the end of President Nixon’s second term, the USA began to shift its focus on “fixing” the USSR much like how China had been “fixed”. It was Nixon who coined the “Two-Hand” policy, in which the USA juggled neutrality between the USSR and China. The USA’s representatives to the USSR always talked with a subtle hint of disdain for China that would always be followed by a claim of neutrality, and while the USSR was unsure if the USA actually disliked China, they operated on the policy of trying to bring the USA over to their side - they could not hope to fight off China alone. One of the more paranoid members of congress, a Democratic Senator from Louisiana, actually agreed with this - and the Washington-Moscow Treaty was secretly signed on March 31st, 1975. This treaty secured an alliance between the USA and USSR if China ever became more trouble than it was worth. To the USA, it was merely lip service. To the Soviet Union, it was one step closer to potentially bringing communism to the USA. 

As a result of the closer ties between the two nations, when the Helsinki Accords were signed in 1975, the Nixon administration kept a much closer eye on it being implemented in the USSR. The USSR would do its best to follow through on the treaty, however, many human rights abuses would still be recorded. The USSR never made any attempt to democratize, despite the urging of the Morgan and King administrations. But still, the two countries became closer than they had ever been before. Starting in 1976, the USSR allowed free passage of Jews to Israel as a sign of good faith. 

The detente continued unabated. In 1977, the Soviet Union finally built enough nukes to rival the United States, and it was here that both countries made an unspoken agreement to stop bloating their militaries to ridiculous levels. Afterall, the United States had stopped the spread of Communism in China through diplomacy and trade, so the USA decided to reduce their military spending, instead subsidizing the military-industrial complex for exports. The arms manufacturers lobbied for increased spending, however, they soon found their niche in the proxy wars in the 80s. Meanwhile in the USSR the reduced military spending meant there could be even more of a focus on modernization to improve the average quality of life of the Soviet citizen. 

The two countries began to truly focus on the path of peace (and profit) in late 1977, when Secretary Agassi met with President Winston Morgan in Bonn, West Germany. Together, they toured the Bundeskunsthalle and attended a concert of Beethoven’s Ode to Joy while eating a meal of grünkohl. Both leaders renewed their wishes for decreased tensions, and President Morgan continued Nixon’s “Two Hands” policy by subtly suggesting the cessation of trade agreements with Chenist China. Their talk would also inspire the USSR to consider opening trade up between itself and its satellite states, and authorizing small-scale “surplus” transactions that were not a part of the centrally planned economy. 

In 1979, during the Afghan Crisis, the Second Triumvirate debated back and forth if direct invention in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan was necessary. Ultimately, Secretary Agassi and Minister Aleks Grigorev (the new Minister of Defense, who replaced Minister Grechko in 1977) decided against it as they believed that the Soviet Union’s military should be reserved in case China invaded through Mongolia. The Soviet Union would continue to supply and train Afghan communists, and allowed them to use Uzbek SSR military bases for mock combat exercises. The USA, while still openly neutral, did supply the Mujahideen with surplus weaponry from the Vietnam war and vehicles. Although neither country admitted it, Afghanistan had become another Vietnam and Korea, a proxy war for the forces of capitalism and communism to duke it out once again. Both of them took great care to keep the proxy war inside the borders of Afghanistan, but by 1981, the war fizzled out into a protracted conflict. 

The 1980s would prove to be an exciting time for the USSR. After hosting the United States at the 1980 Olympics in Moscow, Secretary Agassi signed a landmark trading deal with the European Community and began the mass production of cultural products for wide-scale export. Things such as posters, books, clothing and even nesting dolls, all with a Soviet flare, began to be circulated around the world. The West, who had already become culturally stagnant with the advent of Chenism and hyper-consumerism, greedily gobbled them up. The works of Lenin became casual reading, while clothes of the Soviet style occasionally became the hottest trend in the Northern Hemisphere. 

Then, the Second Triumvirate was faced with yet another quandary. Should they continue the process of normalizing trade with the West, or subsidize the rising prices in their satellite states? Both Secretary Agassi and Minister Grigorev decided on the process of slowly and carefully opening up trade[2]. Chen raised an eyebrow at this, and the USA began frothing at the mouth. The Triumvirate’s official ruling was that trade would be opened up very gradually, first in the outer Eastern Bloc and working its way inwards towards Moscow. Despite the efforts of reforming the economic, industrial and agricultural systems of the Soviet Union, there were still many products and machinery parts that the Soviets simply could not produce fast enough. They would need a great many items imported to fully retool their factories, and with it, the quality of life for the average Soviet citizen. To satisfy the hardliners, it was only the Warsaw Pact countries that had barrier free trade. However, there was nothing stopping the government from buying the splendors of the West through the Warsaw Pact. 

Overnight, the USSR began importing foreign food, agricultural products, fertilizers, advanced machinery and computer terminals in record numbers. Holden Terminals, Pan-Atlantic Business Machines, FulTec and 4M all scrambled for contracts with the Eastern European states. The Soviets began fully focusing on bringing up the quality of living of their citizens, while also secretly preparing for a war with China. Warm relations with the USA also prevented lots of ballistic missiles from being placed all over the world. 

In 1981, the Triumvirate quickly took notice of how efficient the updated factories were, and began subsidizing upgrade programs not only in the USSR itself but throughout the entire Second World. The Byelorussian SSR was turned into one giant factory complex, designed by Chinese Exiles. The Latvian SSR had its own complex of superfactories built, and that was where a majority of the USSR’s cultural products were built. These factories would become so large and complex that the USSR began importing workers from the Warsaw Pact in a special work program that granted the workers citizenship by 1986. In 1982, with the help of Chinese architects, the first Soviet Superfactory was built in the Turkmen SSR. 

The Soviet Union never stopped dreaming of the stars, however. In 1974, the Soviet Union had made their first manned mission to the moon when Soyuz-14 landed on the lunar surface. Secretly, Secretary Agassi and Minister Grechko both believed that the next world war would happen in space, be it from nukes dropped in space or countries using hypersonic spaceships to invade other countries. This was the Soviet Union’s main military priority since 1976, when the United States established Outpost One. The Industrial Goliath of China could easily create an army of spaceships and conquer the Moon and then the Earth. The USSR took great care to ensure that their plans for the upcoming “space war” were kept a great secret from both the USA and China. In 1978, the first prototypes for space-based weapons were tested in secret in the Arctic while the rest of the world was busy watching the 1978 Winter Olympics. In 1980, the Soviet Union began drafting up plans for their first space base, meant to also be a satellite relay station and later an automated numbers station. A small amount of the trillions of western products imported in 1981 were dedicated solely to this “Tunguska Protocol”. 


Soviet propaganda poster depicting the plans for Lenin’s Vigil, circa 1982

In 1982, the Politburo noticed large amounts of government funds being directed towards a “Cosmic Defense Protocol”. Western machinery parts that were requisitioned for upgrading factories mysteriously vanished. Initial reports from Secretary Agassi claimed that it was merely a clerical error, but when Minister Grigorev pushed back, an official investigation was called. 

In April of that year, the investigation was concluded. The investigation found that Secretary Agassi and Minister Grigorev were diverting huge portions of the defense budget on a Soviet Space Weapons Program that seemed not only impractical, as both the United States and China had not shown any effort to weaponize their space program, but paranoid as well. The hardliners accused Secretary Agassi of being mentally unfit to lead the Soviet Union.

In May 1982, General Secretary Agassi would resign from his post as he realized that if he went through on righting the Sino-Soviet split, he could never make good his plans to truly elevate the life of the Soviet citizen. This was followed by Minister Grigorev being impeached for such an overzealous response, and Director Andropov was found dead in his office. 

In an emergency session of the Politburo, the Third Triumvirate is formed. Demyan Petrov was picked as the Minister of Defense, while Yemelyan Fedoro was chosen to be the Director of the KGB. Both men were very liberal, coming from the Ukrainian and Latvian SSRs respectively, and so Gennady Yanayev, a hardliner communist, was chosen as the General Secretary to appease the conservatives. 

The USA, still playing neutral, expressed their condolences with Agassi’s resignation and hoped to continue foster good relations between the two of them. This resulted in President Morgan pledging to help the Soviets in their own endeavors in space. It was here that Chairman Chen proposed a project to build a joint USA-USSR-PRC space station together - the Station for International Cooperation and Friendship. It would be designed and built by scientists and engineers from all three nations in the hope of fostering better relations, and it was the first decision of the Third Triumvirate, passing with a 2-1 vote. Over time, more and more nations would join the project, such as the European Union, Brazil, India and even South Africa. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Po1rpnYwlY&pp=ygUeZHNjaGluZ2hpcyBraGFuIG1vc2thdSBlbmdsaXNo 

This new Triumvirate was even more economically liberal than the one that came before it. In 1983 the Soviet Union adopted a fourth constitution. This constitution, crafted during the dizzying heights of the Glorious Decades, allowed for the import of select products approved by the state. The Soviet Union also allowed for the export of cultural products to all countries, including China. Citizens could buy and sell traditionally “subversive” material but they had to pay a huge tax on it and would be put on a list. 

The 1983 constitution resulted in the USSR economy exploding overnight. The Lithuanian SSR would import several million Orthodox bibles, and suddenly half of Lithuania was on the KGB’s watchlist. This would lead to a very small uprising between the native Lithuanians and the Soviets, but it was quickly crushed by the KGB with religious materials being banned from imports. This was lifted a year later after a series of mass demonstrations by muslim Soviets in the Central Asian SSRs. 

One of the results of the close ties between the USA and USSR was the barrier-free travel introduced in 1983. A massive Soviet rock concert in Moscow featuring Dschinghis Khan attracted over 4 million people from both the East and the West. The Baltic SSRs became the site of a huge tourism industry. American and European businesses built factories all over the Kazakh SSR. Borscht was added to the menu of McDonald’s in 1984, and clothes manufactured in the Tajik SSR became the height of western fashion. The Azerbaijani SSR became extremely rich as its oil was sold to Turkey and Europe, and soon all of the USSR was being choked in the pollution of progress. Disco saw a resurgence across the world. And in 1984, Soviet citizens from every Republic came to Los Angeles to compete in the Olympics, and won quite a few medals. 


The first McDonald’s opened in the USSR, 1987

Finally, in 1985 after pressure from the USA, the USSR created the Concord of Moscow, which was essentially the USSR’s version of the Shanghai Accords. Being prototyped with barrier-free trade between the Estonian SSR and Finland, the Triumvirate finally lifted all trade restrictions. It solidified completely free trade between members of the Eastern Bloc and even allowed them to transition out of planned economies, but most importantly, it allowed any citizen of the Soviet Union to petition the government to import almost any product from the west. With the dawn of free trade, the Communist Party reimbursed each citizen with a small portion of the profits from their exports, creating the first Universal Basic Income. 

It was not all sunshine and rainbows, however. President King and Secretary Yanayev did not walk through meadows holding hands. The hesitation of the USA to honor the Washington-Moscow Treaty made the KGB increasingly suspicious of their supposed ally. Without a non-Russian like Agassi as the General Secretary, the policy of “Pan-Soviet” citizenship began to fall apart. In 1984, a massive terrorist attack disrupted the irrigation draining the Aral Sea, and an uprising in Estonia was put down in 1987. Anti-Azerbaijani race-riots would happen in Armenia throughout 1987, and 95% of the Kazakh SSR would become completely inhospitable to human life due to pollution. 

In 1988, the Soviet Union’s economy was valued at $4.02 Trillion, with some of the most valuable stocks in the world being state-owned Soviet companies. The economy is slowly transitioning out of being centralized and planned, and every citizen has at least one color TV and automobile. Not all the TVs were made in the USSR, nor the automobiles, but the citizens held a special pride for the products they made themselves.The Soviet Union and the United States were set to launch their first joint manned mission to the Moon to finish Lenin’s Vigil. 

But then, on one fateful day in June, Secretary Yanayev was called into a top secret but urgent meeting by Minister Petrov and Director Fedoro about the rapidly developing situation in the Middle East…


[1] The KGB wanted to keep a close eye on them, afterall.
[2] The idea for this ruling was so that the Soviet Union could again focus its resources on a potential war with China rather than propping up its satellite states. The idea of opening up was inspired by Gierek’s policies in Poland. 
[3] Unlike Outpost One, Lenin’s Vigil would never be completed. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=46PQWSoQUaM 

Section 2: The Green Miracle (1988-2000)

Moscow was immensely disappointed with Saddam Hussein’s decision regarding Iran. While the Politburo was saddened at the loss of Ruhollah Khomeini and the death of the Islamic Socialist movement, open war between Iran and Iraq could result in wide-scale total war throughout the Middle East. Minister Petrov, who had been working closely with the USSR’s ambassador to Iraq, was blindsided by Hussein’s suggestion of using nuclear weapons. To assure the rest of the Triumvirate, Minister Petrov promised he would resign if Iraq ever used their nuclear arsenal. 

On June 8th, 1988, Petrov submitted his resignation. 

With the accidental nuking of Tel Aviv, the Egyptian Coalition had run out of luck. Israel now had only one option to possibly save itself - the Samson option. And just like Samson toppling the pillars of the Philistine Temple, this action would topple the pillars of civilization and bring an end to the Glorious Decades. With the overwhelming force of the United Arab Army concentrated in and around Israel, many nukes slipped through their net. Soon Cairo was hit, then Beirut, followed by Damascus… the list went on. The Arab nations started launching warheads that were being tossed like water balloons as the process of mutually assured destruction was carried out. While the USA slept, the Middle East burned. 

Secretary Yanayev however was not as concerned as his peers. As far as he was concerned, this did not impact the Soviet Union. Petrov’s replacement, Ivan Voronin, viewed it differently. To Voronin, this was a wake up call. The USSR, and the rest of the leftist world for that matter, had stagnated and rotted ever since trade was opened up in the late 1970s. The average Soviet citizen lived better, yes, but at the cost of their heritage and their pride. Agassi was foolish to believe that the stars were the site of nuclear war when it was happening on their southern border. Minister Voronin was a stern believer in Brezhnev’s policies, and his first proposal to the Fourth Triumvirate was that the Soviet Union must once again be a defender of the burgeoning socialist movements that would inevitably spring as a result of the inevitable depression. Secretary Yanayev was also strongly urged by the Chairman of the State Planning Committee to gradually pull back on all “unplanned” economic activities. 

While the rest of the Politburo was initially skeptical of a depression, those fears quickly became reality when stock markets across the world collapsed and tourism took a permanent nose dive. Demand for Soviet cultural products dried up by July, and soon only the members of the Warsaw Pact could afford the USSR’s factory-made products. By August, the only shipments the USSR made to their western allies were essential machinery parts. The Minister of Agriculture and Food delivered an alarming report to the Politburo in September - harvests in the Ukrainian SSR were actually down for the 3rd year in a row. This was normally not a problem, as the USSR could simply import more food from the USA. However, with the entire transportation infrastructure of the world relying entirely on fossil fuels, importing would very quickly not be an option. The USSR instead began construction on a pipeline to divert the rest of the Aral Sea to supplement the Ukrainian SSR for the next harvest. 

For the entirety of its existence, the Soviet Union was never concerned about the environment. “Progress at any cost” had been the policy of Stalin and never stopped, even under Khrushchev, Brezhnev, Agassi and now Yanayev. Except, now almost a third of the once-arable land of the USSR was now tainted with industrial pollutants, toxic fertilizers, and acid rain. At the current rate of consumption, it was predicted that even simple staples such as bread would run out by January 1st, 1990. Immediately, a ration system was introduced. Citizens were encouraged to grow their own food in gardens, and in spring 1989, a selection of grain seeds were sent to every citizen who wished to grow a garden. 

Another aspect of life that was immediately changed was the production of “non-essential” goods was to cease by December 31st, 1988. The USSR had only barely begun to open up, so the transition was easy to stop. Citizens were allowed to keep certain products as long as they filled out the required paperwork and sent it to the State, or else risk a visit from the KGB. In 1989, this would be taken a step further, and the Ministry of Efficiency was created. Any excess luxury goods, such as surplus toasters, or old broken down automobiles, were to be collected and their metal repurposed and their wood burned. 

In October 1988, the USSR got a desperate plea for aid from Chairman Chen. He was begging for the Soviet Union to integrate buying Chinese products into their planned economy. Secretary Yanayev laughed to his face, and that was the last diplomatic meeting either country would have with each other. 

Then in November 1988, the Moldovan SSR attempted to secede from the USSR and join Romania, which the Communist Party of Moldova believed was weathering the crisis better. However, not a single citizen outside of Moldova would learn of the attempted uprising. Enter Sergei Savateev, an up-and-coming officer in the KGB. He was a truly ruthless man, and used not only traditional methods of coercion (at least for the KGB) but also some that could be considered almost American in nature. Soon, Moldovan politicians began dropping like flies, either from sudden heart attacks or simply disappearing, never to be seen again. Pro-Independence rallies turned into violent riots that left hundreds dead. Soldiers with pro-Romanian sympathies would die in horrific training accidents, or foolishly clean their guns while they were somehow loaded. Savateev was of the firm belief that Romania had betrayed the USSR over 30 years ago by exploiting the first Sino-Soviet split. The speed and brutality with which Savateev used to pacify the Moldovan SSR impressed, and horrified, many members of the Politburo. 


Sergei Savateev’s official state portrait, 1993. Expect to hear about him a lot.

The Soviet Union was adjusting very rapidly to the worsening depression, but it would soon be put to the test when on December 7, 1988 a massive earthquake would devastate the Armenian SSR. Over one million casualties would result from this disaster, along with trillions of rubles[1] of damage. The Red Army was sent in to regain order after Yerevan was lost to rioting and looting from bored Armenians. The reconstruction of the Armenian SSR would be a topic of fierce debate in the Politburo for the next couple of years, but it slowly became clear that no country in the world had the resources to fully reconstruct the republic. 

New Year’s Day 1989 was a bleak celebration. The government temporarily lifted the restrictions of many luxury goods, such as champagne, beef and toys. As Secretary Yanayev gave a speech after an unusually militant and grandiose Red Army parade, he candidly stated that while the worst was yet to come. It was because of the Soviet Union’s strict adherence to Marxism that allowed it to come out on top during the Great Depression and the Great Patriotic War. Already, every single stock market in the world had shut down with the exception of the New York, London and Brussels exchanges and even then they were only open once a week. The Eternal Depression, as it came to be known, would cause international trade to practically vanish. This caused a massive shift in internal politics in almost every single country - right-wing capitalist countries were morphed into glorious left-wing socialist states, all on their way to communism. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mwAGw92RHQc 

And it would be the Soviet Union who would guide them. 

Already, France had become a communist state with the election of Arlette Pascal. Mexico elected far left socialist Edmundo Gutiérrez who had campaigned on the death of corporate executives. The General, the leader of Myanmar, was already doing this: thirteen of the richest men hung from flagpoles in the Capitol, picked at by crows. As the KGB began recalling agents, some even predicted that the USA would soon become a fully socialist state under President Elliot Graves. There was a Red Wave sweeping the world.

Not all of the changes to nations were hopeful - Czechoslovakia, which had already been fracturing internally, finally split apart. It was remarkably peaceful - most of the world was still in the peaceful daze of the Glorious Decades. The KGB kept a close eye on this, along with the attempted uprising in the Latvian SSR that year. Finland was growing worryingly close with Sweden and Norway, who were in talks of forming a Union. 

The Soviet Union proposed their first attempt at leading the charge of Communism would take place in Iran. Minister Voronin claimed that, because Iran was on their border, they could not risk the Islamic Socialist movement stagnating once again. And this time, there was no pesky CIA to stop them. The Shah had recently been overthrown, and a new Revolutionary Socialist Party of Iran was taking over the government. While admirable, it soon became clear that they were not going towards the path of communism. The Iranians would be shown the ways of communism, and it would be Minister Voronin who would do it himself. Soviet tanks began rolling across the border, armed with water cannons and other riot-control weapons. This caused a huge uproar from the nearby Armenian SSR, which was still recovering from the earthquake and felt that they were being abandoned by Moscow. 

A week later, the Iranian Soviet Socialist Republic was established and joined the USSR. The purpose of the Soviet invasion of Iran was actually to see if they could put off some of the fires in Iran’s oil fields and salvage some of their fuel. After the earthquake in the Caucus heavily disrupted the flow of oil to Moscow, the Politburo realized that their fuel was running on borrowed time. This plan would see immense difficulty being implemented, as the Soviets had to invest heavily in the all-but destroyed Iranian infrastructure. The Soviet Union drained entire rivers in an attempt to stem the fires that Iraq lit, but brutally thick oil fires erased any crop yield in 1990 and 1991, on top of workers dropping like flies from cancer cases. By 1992, it was clear that this plan was useless. 

This would not be the only invasion that the USSR would orchestrate in 1989. Later that year, the Soviet Union would properly invade the Democratic People’s Republic of Afghanistan and reform it into the Afghan Soviet Socialist Republic. However, the Afghan SSR was an even bigger failure than the Iranian SSR. Drought, desertification and radiation made almost all the arable land unusable by 1991, requiring the Soviets to support them with surplus food and aid. And every day, waves of starving, radioactive refugees swarmed the border. Pakistan would shoot them on sight, which caused them to make a beeline for the Afghan SSR and the hope of getting into the Soviet Union. The Soviets attempted to integrate as many of them as they could - they were free labor, after all - but they were rapidly running out of space and resources. Minister Voronin kept trying to insist that the Soviet Union must be the nation that would guide these fledgling republics to communism, but as life got harder, the Politburo made the controversial decision to pull out of the Iranian and Afghan SSRs by 2000. 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs eagerly expected a response from the United States regarding Iran and Afghanistan, anticipating the USA to pull out of treaties and to treat it as an act of war. The USA was starting to have their hands full, and all they could muster was a shouting match between the White House and the Kremlin. Secretary Yanayev took all the treaties that the USA and USSR had signed throughout the Glorious Decades, brought them to the Politburo, and proudly burned them. In truth, it was a formality - the Secretary had secretly loathed the way the country was going before he took office, and even then, he was mainly outvoted by the other two members of the Third Triumvirate. Now though, with hardliner Minister Voronin on his side, he could finally steer his country in the way it was meant to go. Only Director Fedoro, and his Latvian sympathies, had to go. No one really knows what happened to Fedoro, only that he was there one day, and Sergei Savateev was there the next. 

All around Moscow, things were starting to fall apart. The Uzbek SSR, which began to see drought and desertification creep in from the Afghan SSR, required more and more aid from the Politburo to keep it afloat. Decades of industrialization had caused arable land to quickly dry up, and a study projected that the USSR would run out of aid by 2005. Things were getting even worse in the Turkmen SSR: after the Aral Sea was completely drained and the land overexploited to grow cotton, the planned economy collapsed overnight. Director Savateev thwarted several terrorist plots and suppressed a growing independence movement. The fields caught on fire however, and a massive fire tornado destroyed Poltoratski in 1990 along with the first Soviet megafactory. The casualties ranged in the millions, and with the Uzbek, Iranian and Afghan SSRs already draining Moscow’s coffers, the decision was made to evacuate Soviet citizens north. 


Drought, desertification and acid rain left much of the Central Asian SSR like this. Here, an abandoned Soviet food truck is left to dry in the sun. Photo taken circa 1999, during the last of the evacuation efforts in the Kazakh SSR. (OOC: screenshot of the Half-Life 2 Mod Swelter, which is set in Kazakhstan post Combine Invasion)

The Hot Summer of 1990 caused much of Siberia to melt, and with it, huge swathes of muddy taiga were exposed. The Minister of Agriculture and Food proposed that the evacuees of the Central Asian SSRs (which were quickly turning into radioactive dust bowls) help clear the exposed wilderness in the south to build more farmland. The Triumvirate approved this, with Director Savateev keeping a close eye on City-545, as the first refugee camp came to be known. 

Secretary Yanayev and Minister Voronin changed their focus to Europe, meanwhile. The leading economists of the USSR made a worrying report: most of Europe’s economies would collapse by 1995 if nothing was done. This could cause Europe to become one giant battlefield not seen since 1914, and with it, the Iron Curtain would fall. The KGB was worried that the burgeoning socialist movements in Belgium, West Germany and Italy might go down the path of “national socialism” like Hitler had before, and so the Triumvirate proposed the Yanayev Plan: Europe could survive, but it would need to carefully manage and plan its economy. And the Soviet Union would be the country to guide Europe. 

In 1990, Soviet envoys were sent to not just the Eastern Bloc nations, but the Western Bloc and Non-Aligned ones as well. The Western Bloc rebuffed them with various levels of politeness[2]. Brussels was actually inspired by the Yanayev Plan, and while they would never admit it, it was one of the reasons that caused the European Union to federalize.The Non-Aligned nations were far more hostile. The People’s Socialist Republic of Albania and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia actually threatened to execute their Soviet envoys on the spot. This was not unexpected, however - Minister Voronin was almost counting on this. 

Yugoslavia had been one of the very few countries to not benefit from the Glorious Decades. Their extreme dedication to isolationism had brought their economy to its knees, and the federal government was struggling to maintain their grip on the populace. Veselin Đuranović’s ineffectual leadership had caused ethnic tensions and independence movements in Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia, and the country had been on the brink of civil war for almost a decade. Many of the various factions wanted to join the Western Bloc and others wanted to align themselves with the Soviets in the wake of the Crash of 1988. In one last desperate attempt to retain national unity and preserve the Yugoslav identity, Yugoslavia launched a not-so-surprise invasion of Albania, Greece and Bulgaria on February 25, 1990. Albania and Greece, both trying to court Brussels, were largely ignored by the Soviet leadership, but because Bulgaria was a member of the Warsaw Pact, the rest of the Eastern Bloc rose up in their defense. 

Bulgaria, which had descended into civil war when ethnic tensions broke out between the native Bulgarians and the Turks, was already fighting tooth and nail for their country’s survival. The ethnic Turks, who had been almost worked to extinction in Chinese-style megafactories in the 80s, had rebelled and declared the Bulgarian province of Kardzhali to be the “Turkish Republic of Bulgaria”. Nobody recognized this nation, however, as everyone had enough on their plate already. The Turkish breakaway state tried to join the military dictatorship of Türkiye, and was in the process of negotiations when Yugoslavia invaded. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LeUkUx9RMn0 

Minister Voronin wanted to show the world the might of the Soviet Army, which had not seen direct conflict since 1968. He ended up withdrawing Soviet troops from Mongolia[3], an event that the Chinese would later exploit. Fighting was initially very bloody and involved trench warfare with lots of infantry[4] and at the behest of Minister Voronin, Director Savateev was withdrawn from his post in City 649. All it would take is a few Soviet-made weapons delivered to a few Slovenian nationalists, some satellite photos of government formations sent to Bosnian rebels, and the poisoning of a Serbian general for Yugoslavia to fall apart. The Yugoslav War was mainly over by January 1991. Most nations of the Balkans would remain at war for the next two decades, as the ethnic groups fought over dwindling resources. 

The fighting did not stop there, however. Both Minister Voronin and Director Savateev wanted revenge against Albania for their siding with Chairman Chen all the way back in the early 1970s. As the various regions of Yugoslavia were fighting each other, the Soviet Union waltzed into Albania and set up a pro-Soviet regime. The partitions of Albania and Yugoslavia were completed in 1992, and the new regimes, loyal to the Soviets, were allowed to join the Warsaw Pact. East German Warsaw Pact troops were kept around for peacekeeping, and secretly helped funnel valuable mineral resources into the USSR and East Germany. 

The Soviet Union had re-asserted itself as the sole authority in Eastern Europe. 

Turning back to domestic affairs, the Triumvirate had noticed that ethnic tensions had been steadily increasing with the growing dust bowl spreading from Central Asia. In 1992, Azerbaijani nationalists sabotaged a natural gas pipeline and caused widespread ecological and economic damage. While the rest of the world was watching in horror as China committed war crimes in Taiwan, the USSR’s Red Army would come in second place in the Geneva Olympics. With the Armenian SSR already under martial law, a permanent Red Army division was established in Dagestan to keep watch on the Caucus SSRs and suppress Armenian insurgents. Azerbaijan SSR’s intact industry would result in the native Azerbaijani being worked to the bone in penal labor, with rebellious Armenians being sent there too. Conditions were kept deliberately weak to excuse harsher punishment and increased sentences. The farmland in the Caucuses were becoming more tainted by the day, so the convicts worked in industrial gulags making replacement machinery for the legions of factories in Western Russia. 

The KGB were watching with bated breath at the Olympic games in Beijing that year, and many were under the impression that it was a trap to hold valuable members of the athletic community hostage. The Triumvirate, now far more open in their hatred of China once again, protested against China’s imperialist conquests in Indochina, Mongolia and Taiwan. It was here that the true purpose of the Yanayev plan was revealed: with the United States no longer in the picture to defeat China, the KGB was secretly co-opting the remaining industry in Europe to mass-produce weapons of war. Bullets from Bulgaria, helmets from Hungary, and rifles from Romania. This actually helped stimulate the failing economy of the Eastern Bloc, briefly turning it into a hopeful recession. The Soviet Union also resumed research into using nuclear power as an energy source for transportation, prototyping it with their navy. 

The Iranian SSR was on its last legs, and in Spring 1993, the Soviets officially pulled out. The Iranians soon devolved into civil war between those who wanted to keep the Soviet-style of Socialism (mainly those already in power) and the proponents of a more Islamic-focused brand of socialism. 

As the crisis worsened, and each summer became hotter and hotter, the USSR’s southern neighbors began acting out more and more. By 1995, almost all the nations south of 40° N were in civil war conditions, and south of the Tropic of Cancer, total anarchy. Tehran only controlled a few hundred km of Iran, and most of Kabul was a wasteland. Türkiye had been an ultranationalist dictatorship for almost six years now, and was constantly threatening to invade Greece, Bulgaria and the Ukrainian SSR. Hungary’s mixed economy fully collapsed, with the nation entering civil war between communist hardliners and pro-Eurofed socialists. Romania was dealing with huge amounts of homeless teenagers, who roamed the cities committing petty crimes as a result of the strict rationing. These various criminal waves escalated into riots which escalated into a full-scale civil war between the once-wealthy industrialists and the government, with the starving citizens caught in the middle. 

In the summer of 1995, edged on by Turkish infiltrators, the Ukrainian SSR led an open revolt against the USSR. Sick of being worked to the bone for the past 5 years, the Ukrainian farmers started burning their crops as a form of protest to demand better working conditions, better hours and better pay. In response, the Red Army, directed by Minister Voronin, started to raze various Ukrainian cities to the ground. Families were broken up, with random members sent to gulags, held hostage, and some simply executed on the spot. Only a few fields were set on fire, as only a very small portion of the farmers actually participated in the rebellion. However, due to the hot, dry air, the fire quickly spread through central Ukraine. For almost the entire month of August, the air was filled from the smoke of the fires and smog that blew in from the Byelorussian and Moldovan SSRs. Whole cities, ones entirely disconnected from the short-lived revolt, were completely burnt to a crisp. In the final week of August, the Red Army gave up the hunt for rebels and focused solely on stopping the spread of the fires. As many as one thousand soldiers are thought to have died in the flames in a vain attempt to stop the fire. It finally stopped at the Dnieper River, and fizzled out. In the end, the rebels were placed on an island and forced to work to death on an empty stomach to show them not to mess with the country’s grain supply. The Politburo conducted an investigation and found that while the fire and the rebellion hadn’t completely crippled the food supply, the Ukrainian SSR would need at the minimum a decade of intense work to rebuild itself as the USSR’s breadbasket. 


Soviet relocation camp in Siberia, photo estimated to have been taken in 1999. Found smuggled in a suitcase in 2016 during a routine KGB raid in south Minsk.

The Politburo began full-scale evacuation efforts from the Caucasus and Central Asian SSRs starting in 1996. As part of the 14th Five-Year Plan, the Soviet Union started to build vast collective farms and living quarters in the Baltic SSRs at the sites of former tourist destinations. The recently resettled Soviet citizens were sent to clear trees and dead vegetation and help build these farms. Many were kept in tiny, cramped temporary houses and separated from their families, forced to live with total strangers. Naturally, this led to increased ethnic tension and eventually to race riots, and soon the Politburo was forced to segregate their settled citizens by ethnicity. After an especially severe race riot between ethnic Armenians and Azerbaijanis, with over 500 dead, the Politburo echoed Agassi’s own words of “From many nations, one People”. In other words, the Politburo demanded full loyalty to the USSR above any ethnic ties. For the stick, the Red Army would routinely patrol the worker’s camps, and for the carrot, the workers were told that they would be reunited with their families after the project was done. 

The Politburo was true to their word, and families were reunited, however due to the working conditions as many as a fifth of them died during the Great Western Resettlement Project of 1996-1999. Even with the vast public housing projects built, the Soviet Union was facing a severe housing crisis as millions of internal migrants were resettled every month. Cramped conditions, no matter how efficiently segregated, would still result in inevitable chaos. And so the USSR turned to the East: millions of acres of land in the once permanent taiga of Siberia were now remarkably green. The Politburo decided to fully exploit this “Siberian Miracle” and gave huge swathes of now empty land to the various ethnic subgroups. Azerbaijanis, Armenians, Georgians, Turkmens, Uzbeks, Tajiks, Kazakhs, and even European Turks, Iranians and Afghans were all given their own autonomous regions in Siberia. 

The Ministry of Efficiency had slowly drained the USSR of its excess wealth. Many automobiles had been broken down and turned into essential products like bed frames and hinges, while televisions were collected and put in public squares to be switched on once a week to spread news throughout the republics. But still, with all the rationing, the government began to notice that workers were reporting exhaustion and weakened immune systems. The Ministry of Health conducted an investigation throughout 1997 and discovered that it was due to mineral deficiencies resulting from a grossly uneven diet. Rationing and food shortages had caused many staples to be continuously out of stock for long periods of time, and while the governments of other countries fed their people tofu, soy and lentil bean steaks and grain-heavy energy bars, the USSR still could feed their citizens genuine bread. Due to a mistranslation in official state documents, an Estonian member of the Politburo signed off on creating the Shchedrost' fermera, or the “Farmer’s Bounty”. With many livestock animals dying of heatstroke, the Minister of Agriculture diverted many of the surplus oats and wheat grains to feed the displaced Soviets. Farmer’s Bounty was made in a very sloppy way - the barely-edible bits of grain were literally ripped up from the dirt, mixed with flour, yeast and water, and baked into a sort of crumbly bread. It was only a last resort, emergency food, however - many in the USSR still had access to genuine food, even if something was always in a shortage somewhere. 

Other notable events in 1997 included a Soviet probe being launched to survey the moon for any mineral and oil supplies. None were found. Secretary Yanayev suffered a stroke on March 10, 1997 and retired from public view. An up-and-coming clerical worker in the Politburo, Constantin Rutskoy, was chosen as his successor. Rutskoy was a rather meek and mild-mannered man, who while diligent and well-intentioned, was easily persuaded during debates with other members of the Politburo. No one thought that someone so suited to be a desk worker would become General Secretary, but that was precisely why he was chosen. Minister Voronin and Director Savateev had held a secret agreement between the two of them that if the Soviet Union was to survive this crisis intact, sacrifices must be made. Yanayev was too liberal and easy going to save the USSR, and while he was a commendable member of the CPSU, he was not General Secretary material. The General Secretary must be someone easily manipulated, someone with a gentle face that would ease the people into the coming chaos. Both Minister  Voronin and Director Savateev made sure that Rutskoy would be picked as General Secretary, and the Sixth Triumvirate was formed. The Sixth Triumvirate was also called the last Triumvirate, as it ruled until the Triumvirate system was abolished with the 2010 constitution. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H4V2jlhWJD4 

The first order of the Sixth Triumvirate was the invasion of Finland. As Secretary Rutskoy lifelessly claimed in a televised bulletin, Finland had been sabotaging Soviet industrial and agricultural efforts, along with personally attacking the leadership of many Warsaw Pact states. Some of the more ridiculous lambasts included being secretly run by Yugoslavian traitors, and collusion with the European Federation. In reality, the Soviet Union, which believed it was rapidly running out of living space and arable land, needed to do something and fast - or else risk total revolt like in Ukraine, just on a Union-wide scale. Finland was simply the easiest option to fix this, other than turning on their Warsaw Pact vassal states. Voronin expected the war to be over by New Year’s Day 1998. At first, Norway and Sweden secretly supplied their eastern neighbor but after a Swedish merchant vessel was almost sunk off the coast of Gotland, the two states made the harsh decision to remain neutral and leave Finland to their fate. Fighting was tense, with a naval blockade in the Baltic Sea, but swarms of soldiers from the Red Army, Poland and East Germany overwhelmed the Finnish troops. General Winter had taken a permanent summer vacation, and so both sides were reduced to fighting in mud, muck and blood. Entire forests were set on fire, and rivers ran red with gore. 


A beached Ukrainian SSR tank on the outskirts of Imatra, Finland. Photographed by Swedish journalists on December 9, 1998. 

The Finnish fought hard, however they were under-fed due to strict rationing. Many defected, entranced by the relative stability of the USSR. The Nordic War would continue for some time, before finally being ended by the Helsinki Treaty on June 19, 1999. The armies of the Warsaw Pact, re-armed by the Yanayev Plan, battered and bruised Finland until they surrendered. The Finnish SSR was established on November 21, 1999, and was ruled by hardliner communists sympathetic to the USSR. 

In September 1999, the resources of the USSR would be stretched to the breaking point. The Kazakh SSR was completely uninhabitable, and the Turkmen and Uzbek SSRs followed close behind. 20 million were dead from starvation due to the over-industrialization of Eastern Europe and Western Russia. The Ministry of Agriculture, overwhelmed by the influx of 50 million domestic refugees, said that not even the Anschluss of Finland could help. Secretary Rutskoy then suggested that the USSR utilize the rapidly thawing rivers in Siberia for irrigation. This was one of Rutskoy’s few thoughts that neither Minister Voronin or Director Savateev planted in his mind, and one of the few decisions he truly suggested of his own free will. As the Politburo began drafting up the plans for the 15th Five-Year Plan, the Minister of the Food Industry pointed out that in the Yakut ASSR, crop yields had actually been steadily increasing for the past 5 years. An investigation into the conditions in Siberia would lead to the Politburo to realize that their people would never know of a famine again. This was called the “Green Miracle”, and the Politburo began to rapidly deploy the displaced migrants in Siberia. Throughout 2000, as part of the 15th Five-Year Plan, the USSR began a massive effort to restructure and organize the rapidly greening Siberia. 

As the new millennium dawned, the USSR stood proud as one of the few nations left that still had its head on its shoulders. Europe was cooking in the heat and was on the verge of civil war. The USA was slowly turning into one giant dust bowl. China had resorted to invading their neighbors, and even then, their population was barely kept in check. Most of Africa and Latin America were in various states of civil war, and the Middle East was in total anarchy. 

But soon, the USSR would have to change if they wanted to survive, as the chaos was only just starting. 

[1] One of the many reasons why the USSR didn’t have a hard time after the Crash was because the immutability of the ruble was never revoked, meaning that it could not be exchanged for other currencies. This meant that foreign corporations in the 80s had to invest in rubles to grow their business, which in turn increased the value of the ruble. 
[2] The UK Labor government strongly considered joining the Yanayev Plan but after a month-long protest outside 10 Downing Street, the Prime Minister was forced to reject the plan. The Third Hellenic Republic also almost joined, but faced similar resistance. 
[3] The People’s Republic of Mongolia had actually been negotiating to join the Soviet Union. Secretary Yanayev and Director Savateev both agreed that it was untenable, however, as they did not have the resources to keep a place so far from Moscow fully defended.
[4] Fuel for mechanized divisions was kept in reserve for defensive purposes.

Section 3: The Fall of the Warsaw Pact (2000-2023)

The 21st Century would prove to be a defining chapter in the Soviet Union’s history. 

As part of the 15th Five-Year Plan, all of Siberia north of the Great Asian Dust Bowl - even previously autonomous regions - were to be dedicated solely to farming. Siberia’s main rivers would be diverted and used for irrigation, then filtered and recycled for human consumption. Like Farmer’s Bounty, water would eventually be used to reward loyalty to the State: criminals were given just barely enough to be continued to be used as labor, and those that were extremely loyal to the Politburo would have unlimited access to pure, fresh water. 

Yet, no matter how many internal migrants “volunteered” to farm, it seemed that most citizens of the Soviet Union were always barely scraping by. Coal was becoming harder and harder to ship in from Siberia, and thus many Soviet megafactories had to be shut down. Energy shipments were sent to the Byelorussian, Baltic and Ukrainian SSRs and used to fuel factories that kept the growing communist metropolises functioning. The first Soviet nuclear power plant was opened on July 7, 2000 in the northern RFSR, and was used to power a Soviet Navy base. The Minister of Energy hoped to have Moscow fully powered by nuclear energy by 2012. Already, the Ministry of Sustainability (helped by the KGB) was meeting their goals on reducing carbon emissions. 

The first republic to be hit hard by the reduction of industry was the Azerbaijani SSR. The republic’s vast reserves of petroleum and natural gas were finally exhausted after being all but spent during the costly Nordic War. And with it, the Politburo stopped subsidizing the republic’s industries. Overnight, almost 75% of the republic’s workforce was out of a job. Overexploitation and severe pollution from the Armenian SSR had made life in the Azerbaijani SSR unsustainable. 

The Ministry of Efficiency had reduced the quality of life of the average Soviet citizen, much to Agassi’s pleas. The average Soviet citizen had a guaranteed roof over their head, a scratchy mattress and three meals a day. For criminals and laborers in the new gulags, it was usually Farmer’s Bounty paired with boiled but dirty water. For the average citizen, it was stale bread and a soup (usually potato, cabbage and beet) with shredded cheese for protein. Members of the Politburo were given increasingly better meals for their loyalty but were never given something extremely extravagant unless it was a special holiday, like New Years, International Women’s Day[1], Labor Day, Victory Day, Constitution Day[2], and October Revolution Day. 

However, much of the splendor and luxury that the Soviet Union had briefly seen during the late 1980s was all but gone. Western style or traditional ethnic clothing were increasingly frowned upon, and in 2004, the Soviet Union implemented the “Standard People’s Uniform”, a large, one-size-fits-all (as very few people were overweight by this point) jumpsuit that was dyed red with dried beets. Cars were outlawed in 1995, with coal-dust powered, slow-moving buses serving as public transportation. Toys were banned in 1997 and instead children were encouraged to use their free time to play street sports, ballet or even take apprenticeships. Books were rounded up and collected in the late 90s to be preserved and placed in special communal libraries which also served as schools. Most western literature was destroyed and/or rewritten to have more eastern themes, like The Lord of the Rings being rewritten to have heavy subtext decrying the woes of hyper-consumerist models. Most importantly though, these libraries allowed the government to keep track of who was reading what, and the KGB always monitored those who continuously checked out subversive books. Officials with large luxury mansions were executed for parasitism, and their mansions repurposed into hospitals, orphanages and temporary housing for displaced migrants, which did earn the Sixth Triumvirate a more favorable view by the general populace. The biggest accomplishment of the Ministry of Efficiency came in 2001, when all the excess luxury western goods from 1985-1988’s Concord of Moscow were collected and disassembled in a failed attempt to recycle the petroleum based products. 


A photograph depicting a convict working in front of a grain silo outside of Leningrad, 2001

Many of the old-timers, who had witnessed the attempted reforms in the Glorious Decades, did not take the new policy of austerity well. The regular state police would routinely conduct raids against smugglers and hoarders of western technology. The biggest of these raids was in October 2001, when a warehouse outside of Moscow was found to contain over 2,000 televisions. 

A citizen’s loyalty to the state, and standing with the current political views of the Triumvirate, also had a large impact on their quality of life. Many members of Agassi’s cabinet or the liberal, non-Russian dominated ministers in the early 80s were deliberately treated badly, their western goods and property taken with extreme force and routinely stalked by Director Savateev’s goons. Loyal citizens were always given better quality food, cleaner water and more comfortable beds. 

But still, for most of the early 2000s, the average Soviet citizen lived a hard life, constantly starving or suffering a deficiency in some vitamin. In 2001, a large ration protest occurred in the Red Square of Moscow, where several grizzled elders demonstrated against the artificial squalor that the Politburo was enforcing upon them. The protest erupted into a riot when a nearby Politburo member was found driving in a private limousine, and the Red Army was called in to regain control. A KGB investigation afterwards calculated the death toll to be over 400, with the Politburo member (the Minister of Electricity actually, who was participating in the test run of an electric car) included. This was followed by a factory bombing in the Lithuanian SSR, but was quickly crushed by Director Savateev. Early in 2002, Secretary Rutskoy rubber-stamped a policy outlawing organized religion in most Soviet republics, however it was enforced only when it was convenient to the government. 

In 2002, the Soviet Union joined the fledgling Alliance of Nations, being the last of the old permanent Security Council members of the UN to join. The Alliance of Nations, unlike the United Nations, was far less centralized on the simple basis that it was nearly impossible to centralize an organization such as the United Nations on such a scale in this increasingly dangerous and chaotic world. Every year, a different city hosted the annual meeting, and every year, fewer and fewer delegates attended. Premier Deng Xiaoping was known for frequently blaming the West for China’s downfall, and the delegate from the United States, finally turned on their longstanding trading partner with the report that despite industry in the First and Second worlds drying up, carbon emissions were still increasing. In a signed report from the CIA along with circumstantial evidence from the British SAS and even one former KGB member, the Ambassador postulated that it was the PRC propping up the industry of South America and Africa. It is not known what was actually said by the delegates in the following ten minutes, but what is known is soon that the delegates for Pakistan and India were at each other’s throats. The remnants of NATO[3] (which was essentially just a piece of paper at this point), quietly speculated that it was a result of India cozying up to China in an attempt to industrialize, while Pakistan was playing up the USSR for similar aid. Less than a month later, India and Pakistan would destroy each other in mutually assured destruction. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6g1PevHvUs 

Soon, the strength of the shield of NATO was put to the test when in 2003, the European Federation almost entered civil war. A later investigation by the PES in 2008 would claim that the leaders of the ECL were actually working with the KGB (which was partially true, but the USSR was exhausted from the Nordic War and was barely keeping its population in check). While Brussels was distracted, Secretary Weisser seized this moment to take West Berlin back from the imperialists. Keen observers in USSR politics at this time would note that General Secretary Rutskoy had no opinion on the matter, as both Minister Voronin and Director Savateev gave conflicting reports on the USSR’s stance on “the matter of Berlin”. Minister Voronin was of the opinion of helping East Germany, while Director Savateev felt it was a pointless, frivolous exercise. In the end, Minister Voronin and Secretary Weisser took over the West Berlin enclave in a matter of hours, as both of them had actually done training exercises for such a military operation all the way back in the 80s, when Voronin was a Major in the Soviet Army and Freida Weisser was a tank mechanic. Various citizens of West Berlin, known for being vocal against their compatriots to the East, were soon rounded up and sent to “ecological reeducation centers”, which was a polite term the East Germans used for prison farms. 


Soviet troops escorting injured East German troops after the annexation of West Berlin, 2003

The European Federation, of course, demanded that their allies help them take back West Berlin. The newly-formed Nordic Union of Sweden and Norway had recently declared their neutrality, out of fear of what had been done to Finland. The USA said that they literally could not spare any troops, as half the Midwest was under martial law and the Southwest was in a year-long drought and heatwave, with Phoenix, Arizona recently declared uninhabitable. The UK, meanwhile, attempted to scramble the RAF when a freak hurricane flooded South England - or at least that was the official story. The UK, still bitter after the Channel Crisis, decided to leave their mainland neighbors to their fate. Canada attempted to marshal their troops, but due to the long process of retrofitting their navy, the earliest they could get to Germany in their steam liners would be a month from then. 

The Politburo celebrated that day. The phoney alliance of NATO had been proven to be a sham, and was soon to collapse. 

Director Savateev, however, did not celebrate. Just like the USA, he was stretching his resources to the breaking point to keep the USSR together. The Tajik SSR, which had been already heavily depopulated, was now only inhabited by a small but extremely stubborn group of ethnic Tajiks. These Tajiks had rebelled against Agassi in the late 70s and now once again seized the means of production and held the farms hostage. Soviet troops were withdrawn from Berlin to help regain order, however, even with Director Savateev’s help, they soon became bogged down in a long, drawn out guerrilla warfare. Seeing the Tajiks revolt inspired the native Georgians, who rebelled and declared independence from Moscow. The Georgian SSR though had far more natural resources than the Tajik SSR, and was also much closer to Moscow compared to their Tajik compatriots, and thus an entire division of the Red Army was sent in to squash the rebellion. The Georgian Rebellion lasted only a year, as it was far less organized than the Tajik Revolt. The Uzbek SSR almost saw a similar uprising when water shortages started to hit the barely-living prospectors mining for uranium and nitrogen and phosphate to be used on fertilizers in the rapidly thawing Siberia. 

The Warsaw Pact laughed at the fracturing of NATO, but by 2004, they weren’t laughing anymore. The Democratic People’s Republic of Albania, which had been extracted of all valuable resources by the East Germans and Soviets the year before, descended into civil war as Moscow no longer believed the pro-Soviet puppet regime was worth propping up. Hungary had finished their civil war and was now strictly an agrarian communist society and was able to produce large amounts of food from 2004-2008, which the government began selling at exorbitant prices to other countries in Europe, at the expense of their own citizens. In Romania, their civil war had entered a new chapter as it was now between KGB-backed Communists and PES-backed socialists. 

Finally, in 2005, after the UK/EU blockade, NATO collapsed. Minister Voronin could not celebrate for long, as soon he was called in for yet another task in the increasingly arduous quest of spreading communism.

In late 2004, the Greek Civil War spilled over into the Eastern Bloc when the KKE requested aid from Moscow. Minister Voronin was still riding the high of fracturing NATO, and so gleefully sent troops into Greece. This disrupted FulTec’s carefully formulated balance of power in the Greek political system, and also prompted the European Federation to send in more of their own troops. The Warsaw Pact mainly kept to Macedonia and Epirus, while the Eurofed held much of the central areas. The far-right ESP held parts of the Peloponnese, Thrace and areas of the north. To almost no-one’s surprise, the increasingly unstable dictatorship of Turkiye invaded Cyprus and the Aegean Islands before collapsing into civil war in 2006.

The intervention in Greece was not a popular one in the Warsaw Pact. Places like Czechia and East Germany felt it was a waste of resources, that Bulgaria was in no risk of invasion from the dramatically unstable Greece and rapidly fracturing Turkiye. Several other countries, like Romania, Hungary and Poland silently agreed with them, but did not want to anger Moscow - at first. In 2006, after Czechia tried to join the (now increasingly centralized) European Federation, they were kicked out of the Warsaw Pact by an angry Minister Voronin. This set a precedent, and throughout 2006, the Warsaw Pact fractured. Many of the states no longer believed that it was necessary anymore after the collapse of NATO. Others believed that Moscow had only used the Warsaw Pact for their own gain, given that they drummed up all of Central Europe to fight in the Nordic War but never lifted a finger when Romania, Hungary and Bulgaria fell to civil war. All of them believed that Moscow was unfairly sharing resources with them. Czechia was followed by Romania, and then Bulgaria, until it was only East Germany, Poland and the USSR. 

In 2007, the final blow would come when East Germany proposed a forced reunification with their western neighbor. Minister Voronin reluctantly declined helping his longtime friends and allies retake the rest of their country. If Minister Voronin still had the might of the Soviet military in the 90s, he would have gladly fought with Secretary Weisser all the way to Bonn. But Voronin had finally faced reality. Half the USSR was now under martial law and was constantly bleeding resources keeping their own border in check. A full-on invasion of West Germany was not only impossible, it was effectively suicide. The German-Soviet split was the final nail in the coffin of the Warsaw Pact. Only two years after the fall of NATO, did the Warsaw Pact collapse as well. 

Normally, Director Savateev would have stepped in and put the fear of Lenin back in these vassal states, but he and Secretary Rutskoy were busy dealing with a devastating domestic crisis. 

Early 2005 was initially heralded as a year of hope when food shortages had decreased to such a level, that rations were actually increased for the first time in almost eight years. But the Green Miracle soon turned into the Green Curse - inexplicably, in the alarmingly warm north, trees began dying off en-masse. The USSR simply cut down the diseased tree corpses, burned them as fuel, and cleared the land for more farms. Yet when workers started dying of flu-like symptoms by the hundreds, then the thousands, the Ministry of Health sounded the alarm. On April 8, 2005, the first case of SARS-CoV-5 was confirmed. SARS-COV-5, or known simply as the “Red Flu”, was quickly spreading throughout Siberia. Director Savateev, Secretary Rutskoy and the rest of the Politburo scrambled to contain the spread of the virus. As more and more Siberian superfarms were quarantined, the Red Army was forced to be called in to enforce it as workers escaped. 

By summer 2005, the first cases were reported in Moscow, and led to a major riot when half the city was quarantined. A suburb in Voronezh was almost burned down after a factory almost caught on fire due to understaffing. The Minister of Health resigned in Fall 2005, feeling ashamed for the cramped conditions of the cities and the malnutrition causing the rampant spread of the virus. The Kyrgyz SSR was finally deemed too costly to keep by Moscow and was hastily mined by the Red Army in winter 2005, before slowly being absorbed into the Great Asian Dust Bowl. The Red Army forces trying to regain control of the Tajik SSR finally gave up in 2007 and fully retreated. As the Soviet forces retreated, they unknowingly spread the Red Flu throughout the decaying Central Asian Republics. 

In the end, all the Politburo could effectively do was let the pandemic run its course and burn itself out. By 2023, cases of the Red Flu still flare up in the fall, but it is no longer as grave of a threat as it was when it first spread. It is estimated that over 341 million would die from the disease between 2005-2025. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QC1aBVDsoWw 

Minister Voronin, aware of the growing pandemic via an encrypted telegram, stayed in occupied Greece as he tried to stop the Warsaw Pact from disintegrating from his mistake with Czechia as more and more Warsaw Pact troops withdrew to their native countries. The unwillingness to move Soviet troops due to the pandemic in addition to the European public growing weary of the war caused the Soviet Union and the European Federation to sign the Truce of Athens in 2007, effectively ending the involvement of both parties in Greece. As Minister Voronin and the rest of the Soviet troops returned to Moscow, Greece entered its final civil war. Along the way to Moscow, Minister Voronin made a stop in Istanbul and established a short-lived Turkish SSR, however by 2011, the USSR would only control Istanbul and the northern coast of Turkiye. This ensured that the USSR controlled the Black Sea all the way to 2027. 

The Warsaw Pact was effectively dead like NATO, and in its place was a loose confederation of chaotic communist states. The “People’s Coalition”, led by Poland, consisted of Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and a now fully communist Albania. Partitioned Yugoslavia was offered a place, but they were too busy fighting each other to pay attention to the shifting politics of the Eastern Bloc. East Germany had formed a union with Czechia, and both Berlin and Warsaw were playing Slovakia and Czechia off each other, resulting in border clashes throughout 2007 and 2008. Poland would send “peacekeeping” forces into Hungary when it was leaked that the government was selling food while their citizens were starving. With all the mineral resources extracted from Central Europe (or at least as much as the Soviets could get with their decaying equipment) and the Red Flu spreading to Europe, Moscow left their once vassal states to their fate.

When Minister Voronin finally returned to Moscow, Director Savateev informed him that the USSR was barely a nation, ravaged by disease, drought, wildfires and famine. Pollution and desertification had rendered entire republics uninhabitable. The Soviet Union was much less a union and more like a dying bear. Their resources were stretched thin. Minister Voronin and Director Savateev were happy to be working together again, using Secretary Rutskoy to rubber-stamp the harsh policies they needed to enact. Once he was back in the Motherland, the first order that Minister Voronin authorized was the creation of a vast border wall spanning the border of China, primarily around Mongolia and Manchuria. The cost in resources, labor and lives was enormous, but everyone in the Politburo was certain it was the right move, as the USSR must protect its food supply or risk total collapse. Millions of workers died, mainly from the Red Flu, but the Triumvirate deemed it necessary. It would prove the right move when suspiciously Chinese-looking refugees showed up in the farm gulags in Eastern Siberia, which prompted large numbers of the Soviet military to be stationed along the Great Wall of Siberia. Soviet energy development had gone a long way since 2000, and over 10% of their remaining Cold War equipment had been retrofitted to be nuclear powered. Tanks and aircraft were kept on standby in case their increasingly unstable neighbors to the south would try to invade the new breadbasket of the USSR. 


A section of the USSR/China border wall, being built by European Slavs. Estimated to be taken in June of 2007. 

In 2008, the Great Asian Dust Bowl spanned Istanbul to Shanghai, going as far south as Mandalay and as far north as Novosibirsk. Huge tornadoes regularly ripped topsoil off of the dwindling arable land, and the few livestock left (mainly scrawny, disease ridden chickens) were consumed by the harsh winds. An F-null storm[4] in April 2008 literally lifted a Soviet military outpost from the ground in the Uzbek SSR. Keeping the outer republics afloat, even if it was just to extract resources, was draining the USSR of almost a quarter of their yearly budget by 2009. 

The winter of 2009 was a particularly harsh one. Almost all of Siberia was melted for half the year, and with it, came a variety of particularly brutal plant diseases. Entire forests began dying off, not to mention all the recently released methane. Forest fires destroyed just as many trees. Shrubs started going extinct, and even crops became affected. Horseradish was thought to have been entirely wiped out until a sample was found in 2026. Desertification was causing minor famines every year, as food could not be transported from Siberia in time. 

Much to Voronin’s disappointment, he had learned that the “ancient Siberian fungi” was actually a failed attempt at a biological weapon targeting Chinese crops: Director Savateev had wanted to wipe out the Chinese without losing a single soldier by removing their food supply. Voronin found this cowardly - the Chinese were worthy of being destroyed in open combat. The team that had developed the project were all dead now, however, and had been removed from history by Savateev for their egregious failure. The biological weapon spread, and soon, plants started dying off en masse across the planet. It is estimated that the “Siberian Reckoning” destroyed over 20 million bushels of grains each year between 2009 and 2099. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9y9r0rMaJNU&pp=ygULa29yb3ZpcyBkYW3SBwkJrQkBhyohjO8%3D 

And all it took was one delayed shipment in 2010 for it to almost come crashing down. In the Komi ASSR, a group of displaced Georgian nationalists sabotaged a nuclear-powered train carrying a supply of Farmer’s Bounty to Leningrad, and Syktyvkar was destroyed. The town became uninhabitable from the lingering radiation. Immediately, martial law was declared throughout the entire Soviet Union. The Triumvirate was urgently moved to a secure undisclosed location in northern Siberia. When Secretary Rutskoy was not present, Minister Voronin quickly called him a traitor and that he had been behind the Syktyvkar Bombing. The Politburo called for a trial, where Rutskoy was tried in absentia. Those that defended him were taken away by KGB agents and never seen again. In the name of security, efficiency, and survival, the Politburo was forcibly reshaped and reformed so that only members loyal to Director Savateev and Minister Voronin remained. Throughout the summer of 2010, it is estimated that over 60% of the entire Politburo was purged, and for the rest of the year, the Red Army, KGB and state police regularly patrolled the cities to purge “pro-Rutskoy” agitators and Chinese spies. The KGB also purged old-time party members all the way back to the days of Agassi. Agassi himself was found hanging from a lamp post outside of his apartment in Vaasa, Finnish SSR. 

On September 4, 2010, Minister Voronin took Secretary Rutskoy’s place for the first National Address in almost four months. Minister Voronin proclaimed that Secretary Rutskoy had been working with the Chinese for almost four years and was responsible for almost every major disaster in the USSR since then, including the spread of the Red Flu and the Great Siberian Blight. Secretary Rutskoy had orchestrated the fall of the Warsaw Pact, and was the reason for the fracturing of Central Europe. Voronin then looked at the camera and passionately proclaimed that he would stop at nothing to save his Motherland, and that effective immediately, the office of Triumvirate would be replaced with him as the Supreme Minister. Lastly, he called upon his fellow countrymen to point out any would-be capitalist agitators, Chinese spies, American traitors, European socialists, and anyone else with Rutskoy-esque mindsets. 

In actuality, of course, Secretary Rutskoy was not a traitor mastermind. He had simply outlived his usefulness as the puppet of Voronin and Savateev. He was promised a secret luxurious life in Krasino, the only respite Director Savateev assured him was a quick death. Voronin and Savateev agreed in a secret meeting in early 2010 that drastic measures must be taken to save what they could of the USSR. Neither of them were actually directly responsible for the Bombing of Syktyvkar, but Savateev did take responsibility for deliberately starving a majority-Georgian populated work camp. 

Two weeks later, on September 18, 2010, the Soviet Union adopted its sixth and final constitution. This constitution was so oppressive that it would cause even Stalin to blush. Freedom of Speech, Press, Assembly and Worship are all finally repealed. A citizen evading work for more than 3 days would be executed for parasitism. Any Chinese-looking person outside of the Beijing District of Moscow would be executed immediately. The Triumvirate was abolished with the General Secretary, now referred to as the Supreme Minister, being the sole head of state. All non-Soviet refugees could work for 10 years in a Siberian Superfarm to earn their Soviet Citizenship. Internally displaced refugees needed to only work for 1 year to regain their citizenship, though the paperwork required made that almost impossible. Any westerner was to be shot on sight. The constitution also solidified that it is through the guiding hand of the Supreme Minister that the country had weathered the worst of the extended crisis, so anyone who goes against the infallible policy of the Politburo will be shot on sight.

With the restructuring of the Soviet constitution and the Soviet way of life came the complete top-to-down restructuring of the Soviet Administrative Divisions. The RFSR was divided in two - the land east of the Urals became the Siberian SSR, and was essentially one giant farm. In a practice later called “Bastion Doctrine”, the Georgian, Armenian, Azerbaijani, Kazakh, Uzbek, Tajik, Turkmen, Kyrgyz SSRs and even the short-lived Turkish SSR were to be evacuated as the Soviet government was pulling out and abandoning the republics by December 31, 2011. This had already been practically completed, however, as an average of 95% of the land in those republics had been abandoned, with the Kazakh SSR empty for almost a decade. This left only 9 republics of the USSR: Russia, Siberia, Ukraine, Moldova, Byelorussia, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, and Finland. The Bastion Doctrine also officially let Central Europe fend for itself, as Moscow now believed that only the “core republics” could be controlled. A few of the now ex-republics[5] tried to declare independence, but with the widening dust bowl, plant diseases, unpredictable weather and creeping radiation, many of the nationalist movements died out by 2013. 

Turning to Europe, the short-lived People’s Coalition lasted only a few years when Warsaw decided that with Moscow turning on itself, they would take the security of Europe into their own hands and first annexed Slovakia in 2010 and then Hungary in 2011. Albania fell to civil war yet again in 2011, and refugees fleeing from the Balkan civil wars and climate change swarmed Bulgaria and Romania, causing a civil war due to the strain of resources and disagreements on how to deal with them. Poland set up a border wall along the southern edge of Hungary, and closed off access entirely by 2015. East Germany, extremely bitter from the betrayal of Moscow, became increasingly militaristic and almost fascistic in nature, adopting the philosophy of “National Communism with German Characteristics” after the death of Secretary Frieda Weisser in 2013. This was followed by the formal annexation of Czechia in 2014. The Polish Commonwealth and the Greater Democratic Republic of Germany then entered an alliance in 2015, called the Berlin-Warsaw Axis, but it was actually just both nations waiting for the other to slip up. 

The mass displacement and resettlement of almost a hundred million people caused intense unrest and in 2013, after an outbreak of the Red Flu in Moscow, the combination of ethnic tensions and squalid conditions caused civil disobedience to explode. As a result, Red Army patrols and KGB raids became commonplace all the way to 2023. 

With a growing number of citizens out of a job due to factories closing down, the USSR instead started to aggressively promote enlistment in the Soviet Army and State Police. Soon, cocky 17 year olds born during the Red Decades were armed and patrolling apartment blocks, always on the lookout for Voronin’s enemies. The Soviet Armed Forces swelled to almost 45 million active personnel, making almost an eighth of its entire population in the military. Moscow’s Police Force was almost 250,000 officers alone. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XR68p_k_I88 

The Soviet Army, after its purging of old-timers (in reality, anyone Savateev or Voronin didn’t like), in 2014 began to try another attempt to research using plant-based diseases to wipe enemy crop cycles. Leka Khalski, the new Minister of Defense, proposed that the Soviet Union launch this weapon against China to delay any potential invasion. Director Savateev used satellite photos to determine the best place to use the prototype weapon, only to make a shocking discovery - all of the vegetation in mainland China was gone. With the exception of some gargantuan farms in Mongolia and Indochina, China had absolutely no agricultural base. There was no way that China was feeding their 2.8 billion population. Director Savateev chuckled and deduced that China was recycling the dead for food. The KGB’s discovery was immediately used as propaganda, and made even the weakest of criminals in the Siberian Gulags thankful for Farmer’s Bounty. This actually increased compliance with the general populace, as the true nature of Siliao was parroted to any citizen who was acting out. “Be thankful you’re not in China and eating your mother!” the Red Army chuckled. 

2015 was a somber year, as Supreme Minister Voronin died of cancer on February 18, 2015 at the age of 74. On his deathbed, he pleaded that Director Savateev take up his mantle. According to his autobiography published in 2025, Savateev was hesitant but agreed with Voronin that it was in the best interest of the country. The rest of February was dedicated to mourning the protector of the Soviet Union, and on March 1, 2015, Sergei Savateev became the Supreme Minister. Savateev worked closely with Minister Khalski to keep an eye on the rapidly deteriorating situations in Europe, China and the USA. In 2016, the USSR confirmed that it was the only member of the Big Four not eating their dead. 

But even with the constant surveillance of the Red Army, KGB and State Police, the USSR was simmering with civil unrest. The Politburo then proposed the Worker’s Lottery in 2016, where once a month, lots would be drawn and the winners would get a week’s vacation in the newly opened “People’s Resorts” in northern Russia and Finland (which were pretty much just public campgrounds, but a week off was a vacation in and of itself). This seemed to be the missing link, and slowly, rebellion died down. Regrettably, a localized riot inside of the Beijing District of Moscow left all the aging Maoists dead. 

Supreme Minister Savateev, the Second Stalin, had pacified the USSR. 

Throughout 2017 and 2018, nuclear power grids were implemented across Russia and Eastern Europe. Due to strict rationing, intensive farming and armed guards patrolling gulags, the last major famine the USSR experienced was in 2019. The USSR hoped to transition their entire navy to nuclear power by 2025. The Red Army began routine military exercises in the Baltic SSRs to prepare for a Chinese invasion, which both Savateev and Minister Khalski believed was inevitable. In 2020, a border wall was constructed along Lithuania, Byelorussia, Ukraine and Moldova. It was named “Voronin’s Wall”, in honor of the man who had saved[6] the USSR from the Eternal Depression. From the wall, Moscow, Berlin and Warsaw all stared each other down like they were cowboys in a Mexican standoff. In 2021, the Soviet Union began to finally feel the effects of climate change yet again, and after much deliberation, the Politburo drafted and implemented a (rather lenient) two-child policy. Rat farms began to spring up across Siberia in 2022, which became the dominant protein source of the Soviet Union, replacing chickens. 

By 2023, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is clinging on to the vestiges of civilization. The USSR is still a nation, and is doing the best of the other former superpowers. Citizens don’t have to eat their own dead. You do your work, you are quiet and you keep your head down. Entertainment is mainly dancing and singing. Once a year, the citizens can go on vacation to the Arctic Sea. Ukraine is an over-industrialized wasteland, having long since lost its status as a breadbasket with the advent of Siberia. Moldova is treated much the same way, being effectively one giant military outpost. Latvia retains a large amount of arable land due to careful planning by the Politburo, and Riga remains a massive Navy base. Estonia enjoys a similar amount of prosperity, but Lithuania has seen a resurgence of Orthodox Christian rebels, which the Red Army routinely uses as target practice. Finland is now the site of massive luxury high-rises for loyal members of the Politburo. Outside of Voronin’s Wall, Central Europe is a corpse that is routinely picked over by Germany and Poland. Bulgaria and Romania had both lost their civil wars, and had fallen into anarchy much like the rest of South Eastern Europe. 


City square in a suburb of Minsk, Byelorussian SSR. An aged Supreme Minister Savateev, speaking to the nation through a televised broadcast, urges citizens to be wary of subversive behavior. Behind him is the Minsk Worker’s Palace. Taken January 7, 2023. (OOC: Screenshot taken from Raising the Bar: Retail)

But Supreme Minister Savateev eyed his western neighbors with suspicion. Berlin was becoming a lot like an old enemy from the Great Patriotic War. Very soon, he suspected, a Second Great Patriotic War would ignite…

[1] Despite a woman never holding the rank of a Triumvirate member, women were allowed to become members of the Politburo, including running a ministry, during Agassi’s reforms in the late 70s. 
[2] After Agassi resigned, Secretary Yanayev moved Constitution Day from October 14 (When the 1975 Constitution was signed) to August 10 (When the 1983 Constitution was signed). 
[3] In 2002, the membership of NATO would be just the United States, Canada, the European Federation, Iceland, the United Kingdom and the Nordic Union. Turkiye was expelled in 2001 as the military dictatorship was not recognized as legitimate.
[4] With the increasingly powerful storms, scientists had largely given up by 2003 to try to classify the storms. People were lucky if a tornado was still able to be measured by the dated Fujita scale from the 70s. 
[5] Despite the Bastion Doctrine abandoning large parts of the USSR, the 10 “shadow republics” were still drawn as USSR territories on official Soviet maps. Supreme Minister Voronin hoped to reclaim them one day. 
[6] Savateev was always careful to credit important accomplishments to Voronin, turning him into a folk hero that is celebrated much like Marx, Lenin, and after 2020, Stalin. 

Part 3
A Country in Name Only
Section 1: Dying Light (1988-2002)

Excerpt from “The Eagle’s Grave: America in the Red Decades” by Amaury Velasqué-Lafontaine, Columbia Press, 899 ASJ

The political history of the United States of America had been shaky ever since 1988. The Election of 1988 was actually a rematch of the election of 1984, in which Texas senator and oil tycoon Franklin Howard King won against his opponent Elliot Fitzgerald Graves, the governor of Oregon. In the 1984 election, Graves won only Oregon and DC. He had platformed on a policy of “Energy Accountability”, which provided research into energy alternatives to oust Big Oil. Needless to say, this was very unpopular with the upper class, and when Franklin King got the endorsement of Permanent Advisor Richard Nixon, the election was practically over. Graves threw in the towel and quietly reduced his influence nationwide to only his beloved Oregon, where he did prototype a small-scale version on his policies that almost ended in a Supreme Court debate. 


Franklin King’s presidential portrait, 1985

In 1987, the Graves Campaign picked up speed again and looked at his shortcomings in the 1984 campaign (which were many). For his running mate[1], he picked Clifford W. Smith, the governor of Pennsylvania and a first hand witness of the Three-Mile Island disaster. The Graves Campaign tried focusing on the American economy, and the fact that it was stagnating compared to the USSR and Chinese economies. Part of his campaign included going to abandoned steel mills, factories and other production sites and having press conferences that featured ex-workers and former owners of the buildings in question. Most people scoffed when Graves pledged to revive American industry in the Rust Belt. America had transitioned to an economy dominated by the financial and service industry, with a growing information technology sector and a shrinking but still gargantuan agricultural sector. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eih67rlGNhU&list=PLw2qu_cqPb-mPzSdT5ml61LSO23OjlgEe&index=2&pp=gAQBiAQB8AUB 

In the United States, the unemployment rate was at 0.4% in May 1988. By the end of June 1988, it had jumped to 14.7% and would only climb. As international trade dried up, Graves’s proposals began to resonate with a vast majority of Americans. Despite not getting Richard Nixon’s endorsement, Graves became a popular choice for the everyday average American. King’s Campaign, meanwhile, was struggling to form a coherent platform in the wake of the Crash of ‘88 and the Sinai War.  

Everyone tuned in to the first Presidential Debate of 1988. Governor Graves wiped the floor with President King. King remained calm, collected, and charismatic, speaking in a soft southern drawl about how tariffs and trade negotiations could be used to stimulate the economy and make America the top dog again, but Graves was far more energetic in his performance. He was acting like he was the nation’s stern and disappointed father. “What President King fails to mention is that tariffs won’t incentivize our overseas industries to return to the mainland. We need jobs for Joe American. And we need them now!”

In October 1988, almost 95 million people tuned into the second debate. The unemployment rate was almost 18%. Hundreds of businesses across the nation had foreclosed and laid off millions of workers. As America switched on one of their five color TVs[2], they were greeted by President King and Governor Graves in the auditorium of the University of California, Los Angeles. King opened and thanked Wall Street and the rest of the American Financial Alliance for their continued support. He said that he had just spoken with Chairman Chen and was in the process of negotiating a trade deal with China. Graves, with his trademark zeal, rebuffed King. “That won’t put food on the table of the common man. We have enough “ifs” and “maybes”, we need “yeses”! Just on my way here, I saw elderly homeless veterans starving and on the streets. We need action, and we need it now!” For the rest of the debate, King fumbled at almost every question, and while he remained charismatic, his answers were vague. Graves remained resolute, almost enraged, and at the end of the debate, promised that if he was elected he would implement a vast industrialization program. 

“Vote Graves to stay out of the Grave!” was the slogan on everyone’s lips by November 1988. The voter turnout rate was 72.9%, and Elliot Fitzgerald Graves became president-elect in a landslide. 


The Election of 1988

King of course won his home state of Texas, but also managed to hold on to the "Moral Midwest" plus Mississippi and South Carolina, both places that had seen increases in their standard of living during his previous term. The Democrats also narrowly retook both the House and the Senate. During his concession speech, President King announced that he would be retiring from politics and returning to his ranch outside of Lubbock, Texas. As part of Graves’s transition to the presidency, he toured various areas hit hardest by the initial shocks of the Crash: California, New York, and Texas, respectively. 

January 20th, 1989 was a strangely warm day, but nobody had paid much attention to that yet. In his inauguration speech, President Graves made several huge promises: the government would help the unemployed find jobs, implement vast social services such as childcare and lunch for kids in schools, and even subsidized housing for those at risk of losing their houses. These new functions of the government would create millions of jobs, but soon the corporate donors of the Republicans took note of how increasingly socialistic Graves’s proposals were. Some pundits would lambast it as communist, much like how they lambasted the new communist President of France, Arlette Pascal. 

Immediately, President Graves, Vice President Smith and their cabinet began drafting up plans for the revival of the American industry. A new department, the Department of American Welfare, was created and began to help unemployed Americans find jobs and keep their houses. When asked about the chaotic state of the world, such as the coup in El Salvador, the civil war in Cambodia, and the rising amounts of socialist movements around the world, President Graves expressed his condolences but firmly stated that the welfare of the American people was his first priority. After the Soviet Union invaded Iran in May and Afghanistan in August, the warm relations between the two countries that had been building since the 70s evaporated. President Graves was a staunch isolationist, and as the economy buckled further, he authorized sweeping tariffs against many nations including former allies and trading partners such as South Korea, China, Japan, and even Mexico. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FFJ6Vv7Sn6o&list=PLw2qu_cqPb-mPzSdT5ml61LSO23OjlgEe&index=20&pp=gAQBiAQB8AUB0gcJCbIJAYcqIYzv 

In September, the Graves Administration announced a landmark bill: the American Union and Workers Act of 1989. This monumental bill made the right to unionize a federally protected right, established a federal minimum wage[3], granted huge subsidies to the rusting factories in cities like Chicago and Detroit, and handed out grants to create new businesses in those areas. 

A few weeks after the tariffs and the bill were implemented, relations deteriorated with a great many of the United States’s former trading partners. The most notable response came from South Korea, which had been extremely anti-communist since its founding in 1953. Graves’s protectionist policies and previous two decades of warm relations with China and the USSR caused anti-American sentiment to skyrocket, and soon the American troops stationed in the Republic of Korea were being driven out by angry Koreans. When the Americans evacuated the peninsula and the North Koreans rolled in, the Graves’s administration position was that of aloofness. Allegedly, multiple American soldiers had been injured and one even killed by South Korean protestors, so Graves’s Secretary of State claimed that the United States would not help a nation so hostile towards it. 

In January 1990, as part of the agricultural revival, the Graves Administration created the Feeding America By America Act. This act would award lucrative government contracts to start-up companies that aimed to grow food for American consumers. Just a few days later, on January 21, 1990, Food, Incorporated would be formed in New York, New York by Donald Keyser. The government took a special interest in Food, Inc, as while a majority of the start-ups in the early 90s would be staple foods like rice or bread, Food, Inc made a protein-rich tofu-like steak made out of soya and lentil beans. The farms that went under, usually farms that sold their products to other countries, were bought up by the government and sold to startups like Food, Inc. These large, corporate owned farms were the infant stages of the modern superfarm. Food, Inc got a notably large amount of land in the Deep South and upper midwest. 

When the Hot Summer of 1990 rolled around, Food, Inc and several other Agro-Businesses like Bayou Beans petitioned the Graves Administration to allow them to sell their products to the heat-wave ravaged Eurasia. The Secretary of Commerce and President Graves debated for a few days but came to the compromise of selling the surplus food only to members of NATO. 

The United States kept chugging away. In one of his few unpopular decisions, President Graves implemented gradual but wide-reaching rationing.The American Union and Workers and the Feeding America By America acts had created millions of jobs, but for every job that was created, it seemed like four more were destroyed. When Graves took office, the unemployment rate was 23.2%. In 1991, it was only down to 16.8%. The government was practically burning money trying to keep the nation functioning. Almost all government agencies had been cut back - the decision to abandon Helios Two was made in summer of 1989. The government was surviving on bonds, but even then, inflation was skyrocketing. Several major banks, such as Morgan-Hughes and American National, offered to donate money to the Graves Administration, inevitably in exchange for favors. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gs_9fXIBpEI&list=PLw2qu_cqPb-mPzSdT5ml61LSO23OjlgEe&index=42&pp=gAQBiAQB8AUB 

“If you truly wanted to help people, you’d donate to the poor!” President Graves shouted to the representatives. The representatives immediately backed down, but the President finally unleashed a bill he had been working on in secret for quite some time. Executive Order 12750, otherwise known as the “Of The People, For The People Act of 1991” was the most radical of Graves’s policies yet, and it significantly overhauled the taxation system so that the richest people had an effective tax rate of over 90%, and made it illegal for any government entity to receive a gift worth more than $250. But this was only secondary to its primary purpose: it made corporations liable to ludicrous (well over a billion dollars) fines if they were caught breaking the law. This Executive Order was at first deemed unconstitutional by the Supreme Court, but Graves later pushed it through Congress where it passed by the Democratic supermajority in the House and barely passed the Senate. 

This Act would single handedly save the government from bankruptcy when in Summer 1991, it was found out that Texas-based oil company King-Chevron was lying about the amount of oil in their reserves. President Graves himself ordered a full investigation, and found that King-Chevron was also guilty of price gouging, racketeering and intimidation of competitors. The CEO, Humphrey King, was forced to pay $472 Billion in damages and the company would later be nationalized in 1992. 

As the 1992 Election Cycle began, President Graves got the nomination unopposed. After fierce debate and several rounds of primaries, the Republican nominee would end up being Jack Dole, the senior senator for Kansas. He campaigned on a platform similar to Herbert Hoover in 1928, where he promised to cut taxes for the rich and re-open trading routes with China and the USSR. Dole was popular at first, as people were open to trading with China and the USSR again and were nostalgic for the Glorious Decades. 

Then, July 1992 came around and with it, the final Olympic Games in Beijing. The Graves Administration was extremely reluctant to participate, but in the end decided to do so at the suggestion of the First Lady, who said that it would be important for the nation’s spirit. The United States ended up taking home 35 Gold Medals, and almost 350 dead due to pollution-related causes. This was further compounded when China invaded Taiwan on August 1, 1992, at the tail end of the Olympics. The Taiwanese begged for help, for aid, for anything, but America literally could not spare anything. Their military had stagnated since the Nixon administration and all their reserve materiel had been requisitioned to help deal with commuter and gas riots. President Graves, however, also didn’t want to risk angering an increasingly unstable and aggressive China. Chairman Chen had become extremely bitter and hostile towards his former allies and trading partners, and Graves didn’t want to risk a few nukes coming for American cities. 

During the Presidential Debates of 1992, President Graves attacked the idea of reforming ties with China and the USSR. “I am not blind to the woes of the world, you would have us ally with those that invade Taiwan and those that invade Yugoslavia?” he pointed out. “Our cities are on fire, our children are starving and you want us to welcome war criminals with open arms?” The moderator, Hal Lehrer of C-SPBS[4], said that the President had spoken out of line and that the debates were for civil discussion, to which Graves retorted that he’s only happy because he has a job and that until the average American citizen is happy again, there’s nothing to be civil about. This outburst, despite the President later apologizing on live TV and saying that he’s been under an unimaginable amount of stress, actually resonated with a lot of Americans who were frustrated at the state of the world. 


The Election of 1992. Notice the demographic shift away from the South West and into the Midwest, South and Rust Belt. 

Graves’s policies had actually managed to win over a lot of hardcore Republican states. In 1992, Dole only won his home state of Kansas and kept North Dakota, Idaho and Texas. It was speculated that Texas voted for Dole in retaliation to the King-Chevron ruling, but regardless, Dole conceded defeat. In his victory speech on the night of November 3, 1992, President Graves reaffirmed his pledge to help the people of America the best he could. He promised that the worst was yet to come, but that he’d be with the American People every step of the way for as long as he was elected into office. 


Elliot Graves’s presidential portrait, 1993

https://youtu.be/1P3PnbRFd_c?si=eFG5iHhFjb4CIZlL 

In President Graves’s second term, he had practically the same cabinet (though the Secretary of Transportation retired in 1993 due to cancer). In 1993, America wasn’t much better. Unemployment was sitting at a stable 21.9%, and many in the densely packed cities were starting to have trouble affording fuel for their cars. Riots due to water shortages, power outages, gas prices and simple rage had caused several of the largest cities to deploy their state’s National Guard to supplement their increasingly militarized law enforcement. Graves’s demeanor (some would say passionate, others would say irrational) put off a lot of the US’s remaining allies, namely Canada and Europe. Europe, partly in response to America’s response to the Taiwanese invasion, decided that they would federalize. Graves’s reply to this was that he’d now have “less letters to ignore”. 

Graves’s approval rating with the ultra-rich, big business owners and hardcore Republicans was steadily nosediving, but his approval with the poor and middle class kept climbing. In the summer of 1993, after Social Security almost collapsed, the Graves Administration implemented the National Relief System - a universal basic income for every member of the nation, funded by taxes on the shrinking upper class. Then, in 1994, he introduced the American Industries Act, which gave grants to start-up manufacturing companies similar to the Feeding America By America Act. 

Later that year, when the United Nations would fall apart following China and the USSR’s withdrawal, President Graves remained unconcerned. All he had to say on the matter was “Maybe the third one won’t allow other countries to invade their neighbors.” 

On May 1, 1994, President Graves was invited to attend the signing of the Brussels Constitution. Graves declined, stating that he had more important matters to attend to, but his Vice President Clifford Smith would end up attending of his own accord. Clifford Smith was far more approachable (at least compared to the President) and was usually Graves's unofficial PR damage control in his second term, so he was welcomed as the United States’s representative during the ceremony. While in Brussels, Smith floated the idea of creating a third international diplomatic organization, an idea that would later become the Alliance of Nations. 

Despite Smith’s efforts, many countries (understandably) distanced themselves from the United States, as by 1994, almost half the world was in civil war conditions, anarchy or even warlordism. Japanese-American relations broke down after the Taiwanese invasion and in 1994, Japan finally repealed Article 9. 

In 1995, Graves was faced with some tough decisions. Oil prices were increasing exponentially and even with government subsidies, public transportation was floundering. The New York “Commuter Wars”, a series of riots in the New York metro system, forced the Graves Administration to take a long hard look at the current transportation system of the United States. This caused Congress to pass the Fuel Reservation Act in summer 1995, and with it, all reserves of petroleum were nationalized by the government and rationed out for vehicles like planes, ships, trains and buses, as they could transport more people. It became illegal to use oil for personal automobiles, with the only automobiles allowed on the road being emergency vehicles - not that it mattered, as very few Americans had the spare change to even drive their cars when food and other basic necessities were rationed and increasingly expensive. 

The Fuel Reservation Act was unpopular, but Graves bounced back in November 1995 with the American Hunger Relief Initiative, later known as the Universal Food Ration. This came at an opportune time, as the Great American Dust Bowl had just ravaged hundreds of farms across the nation, and hunger was starting to become a companion to many Americans. To help pay for this, even more “non-essential” government programs were scaled back or cut entirely, with the Lunar Space Program being permanently retired. In 1996, the last five astronauts would leave the Moon, never to return again. All leading food corporations were also nationalized, and Food, Inc was broken up into over a dozen different smaller companies.

https://youtu.be/Clj8htWcFho?si=PniFyAdl3XgHAwSP 

Even with all the welfare programs, government reach and an increasingly militarized police force, 1996 was the year that riots and civil unrest started to become the norm and not the exception. In the increasingly chaotic southwest, water riots in Los Angeles and throughout California would lead to the Governor of California to be assassinated on June 5, 1996. In the Rust Belt, the only area actually seeing any economic growth, one angry bus driver would kick off the Detroit Gas Riots which would leave almost 100 dead. 

By September 1996, President Graves was extremely unpopular with the political and economic elite of the country. He was impeached in 1995 for threatening to “beat senseless any chickenshit member of Congress who didn’t pass the goddamn hunger bill”. The few Republicans in the House put forth several motions to invoke the 25th Amendment and remove President Graves from office, but it never passed as President Graves was too popular with their constituents. 

During the election cycle of 1996, observers noticed that President Graves seemed to be more calm and collected - the stress of the presidency was breaking him, and he was only too relieved to not have to run again. President Graves got results, no one could deny that - but the DNC wanted someone a bit more level headed for the presidency. Several politicians participated in the primaries, including the Governor of Minnesota and the Senior Senator for New York, but Vice President Clifford Smith secured the nomination. After some debate, he picked Democrat Governor of Maine Roy Sanderson as his running mate. Smith campaigned on a platform of continuing President Graves’s work while also mending ties with America’s now distant allies. Being a witness of the horrors of nuclear power, Smith promised to fund research into alternative energies to get America’s cars going again. 

In 1996, Jack Dole won the RNC nomination unopposed. He campaigned on removing the ration system as the RNC felt that the worst of the crisis must have surely passed and that America was ready to resume her place as the financial capital of the world. However, they were sorely out of touch and performed even worse. 


The Election of 1996

Dole had actually managed to lose a state, resulting in yet another Democratic landslide. Fewer Republican representatives reached the House and the Senate, making the Democratic majority even wider - Jack Dole actually lost his seat and was ousted by a Democrat from Topeka, Kansas.

As Graves reached the end of his second term, he became notably more relaxed and calm. He would end up giving a farewell speech in early January 1997, with he and Clifford Smith both pledging to keep doing whatever they could to help the country. On January 20th, 1997, President Elliot Graves would leave the White House and never return. In 1998, he would set up the American Hope PAC, and retire from active politics to run a farm in Grants Pass, Oregon. Clifford Smith and Roy Sanderson frequently visited him to ask for advice to which he would kindly give. Elliot Fitzgerald Graves, 40th President of the United States, would die of cancer on October 2, 2007 in his farm outside of Grants Pass, Oregon. 


Clifford Wilfred Smith’s presidential portrait, 1997

During Smith’s inauguration speech, he reaffirmed his commitment to helping the average American weather the Second Great Depression and also of resuming diplomatic relations with the remaining nations of the world. 

https://youtu.be/tsgw0W1RE5A?si=agD3Z3UqqqLw3OXt 

President Smith was just as radical as President Graves, however he was far more subtle about it. Taking a page from FDR’s book, President Smith authorized the National Landmark Creation and Maintenance Act of 1997, which created over 600,000 jobs and tried to maintain the remaining national landmarks[5] as well as create new and existing landmarks. Throughout his two terms, President Smith would authorize the creation of 29 public monuments. Notable ones include:

The American Workers Monument in downtown Chicago, completed in 1998
The Nixon Monument in Yorba Chenda, California, completed in 1999
The National Monument for American Farmers outside of Lincoln, Nebraska, completed in 2000
The Monument to Public Service (featuring Presidents Theodore Rosevelt, Abraham Lincoln, Franklin Rosevelt, George Washington, Richard Nixon, and Elliot Graves) on the lawn of the White House, completed in 2001
The National Memorial for Vietnam Veterans at the gates of Arlington National Cemetery, completed in 2002
The National Monument of American Bankers, Entrepreneurs and Stockbrokers, outside Times Square in New York City, completed in 2003

Each of these monuments were meant to be tourist attractions: they were built around the nation, and also heavily advertised, with a televised opening ceremony that invited the heads of state of many nations once close to the United States. Many nations declined, however - the President of Canada only attended the ceremony in 1998, while the Prime Minister and King of the United Kingdom attended the 1998 and 1999 ceremony. Smith gave up sending invitations by 2002. 

Another initiative that Smith championed was the American Automobile Resurgence Initiative of 1997. This program allocated huge funds to research and implement a way to retrofit most cars to use alternative energy sources. Various sources were tested, with batteries charged using geothermal, hydroelectric, wind, and solar energy. While these were being worked on, Smith also approved a program to create a car that could run on coal or burned wood. There were quite a number of issues related to the alternative energies, but later that year on May 6, 1997, Ford-Chrysler would unveil their new coal-dust powered automobile, known simply as the “Steamer”. It was only available to the very rich however, at the low, low price tag of “only” $500,000, though emergency and federal services could get up to 80% off. Throughout the summer of 1997, as emergency services bought up coal-powered ambulances, reports of the cars overheating and exploding became more and more prevalent. In the fall of 1997 an investigation was conducted and found that Ford-Chrysler had rushed production to get the federal contract, and under the “Of the People, For the People” Act, Ford-Chrysler was forced to pay almost $257 Billion in fines. This bankrupted the company, and it was later nationalized and renamed to American Automobile Manufacturers in 1998. 

Research into alternative energies would continue for some time, until finally petering out in late 2001. Geothermal was only viable in the upper Midwest and Hawai’i, making refueling stations impractical. Solar was unreliable due to the amount of soot, smoke and smog in the air. Hydroelectric required water (obviously) and with what seemed like almost half the country in an almost permanent drought cycle, that was impractical. Wind was the only option left, but not only did wind power stations require lots of rare, precious metals that the USA didn’t have anymore, so did batteries. Rechargeable batteries were in their infancy[6] and required an enormous amount of resources to produce on a scale that could revitalize the American automobile industry. Lithium, Aluminium, Copper, even plastic were all used to create batteries - metals that the United States had sold to China in the 70s and 80s (for a great price!). 

A few prototype refueling and recharging stations were made. A geothermal station was built in Yellowstone, Montana, a hydroelectric station was built in Saint Paul, Minnesota, a solar station was built in Eureka, California and a wind station was built right outside Washington, DC. 98 cars with rechargeable batteries were built, and given to important government officials that frequently traveled the country. In August 2001, after the Secretary of Transportation’s car had a malfunction in the Mojave desert and he did not arrive at his destination, a search was called. The Nevada National Guard later found the car after a few days of searching, but it was too late. The Secretary was found dead of dehydration, and cooked like a pizza. Further examination found that the car’s battery had exploded, and while the head of the project assured President Smith that these were only temporary setbacks, the rest of the 97 cars were suffering from similar technical issues. A prototype limousine exploding in October 2001 was what convinced President Smith to pull the plug on the project. 

And so, the only option left was to use the expensive, prone to exploding Steamers. AAM was brought back from the dead and was used to manufacture cars for the government, military and corporations. Research was of course conducted to try to lessen the chance of an explosion, and by 2012 the risk of an internal explosion was only 0.9%. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M_Ld8JGv56E&list=PLw2qu_cqPb-mPzSdT5ml61LSO23OjlgEe&index=39&pp=gAQBiAQB8AUB 

During Smith’s presidency, the effects of climate change had become very undeniable and alarmingly fast. Almost half of the southwest had been shoved into Denver, and housing in cities was occupied as soon as they were built. This would lead the Smith Administration to create the Sustainable Urban Expansion Act of 1998, which would place hefty taxes on land that could be used for agriculture. In turn, state and municipal governments were given extra funds from the federal government to help develop housing for the increasing number of displaced citizens. To further incentivize internal migration to areas better suited for human life, the government subsidized many previously private services, such as shipping, water treatment and purification. 

When the Governor of Alabama authorized penal labor to make up for the cost of food production, the Smith Administration threatened to send in the Armed Forces to forcibly break up the prison-labor industry. The Army was slow to mobilize and so the State of Alabama sued the Smith Administration. It went all the way up to the Supreme Court, and in a 5-4 ruling, the Court declared that penal labor was legal under the 13th Amendment. In these exceptional circumstances, they argued, the forced labor of convicts by corporations was legal as long as it increased the production yield of essential goods such as clothing, metalworks and food. The corporations using these convicts would be required to pay for clothing, food and water to feed these workers, in addition to housing and also allowing federal agents to check their living conditions and ensure the convicts were treated fairly. 

President Smith was far more invested in geopolitics than his predecessor. He attempted to mend ties with the European Federation and the USSR, however, both of them rebuffed him. When the USSR and the rest of the Warsaw Pact invaded Finland, the Smith Administration cut all diplomatic ties with the member states of the Warsaw Pact. During the Berlin Blockade Crisis of 1998, Smith then helped spearhead the negotiations that would lead to the USSR lifting their blockade in exchange for a reduced nuclear presence on both sides. 

In 1999, President Smith requested Congress to vote on joining the Alliance of Nations. Even with a Democratic majority, the bill barely passed. Many in the country were skeptical about how helpful the Alliance of Nations could be to the US. The United States joined the Alliance of Nations on November 6, 1999, and became a permanent member of the new Security Council. 

Another bill President Smith pushed through Congress was the Reeducating America Act of 1999. Originally drafted by President Graves before he left office, the act would subsidize the collapsing education system of the country in an attempt to combat the falling literacy rate and create a new generation of scientists, engineers and other skilled workers to help tackle the problems that America would soon be facing. This initially caused college enrollment to skyrocket until it was quickly learned that many of the applicants had no intentions of actually using their education to better the country. Later in 2000, the Act was reworked into being a lottery-based scholarship system. It was too little, too late however - by September 2000, most colleges around the USA (and the world for that matter) would close for good. 

When the 2000 election cycle rolled around, President Smith secured the nomination unchallenged but was facing a steadily decreasing approval rating. The failure to revitalize the American automotive industry and the education system had significantly impacted Smith’s public image with the elite, and the strict rationing and environmental triage policies had made him unpopular with the poor. 

The RNC meanwhile had over a decade to rethink their strategy. The Republicans would have to go populist, rather than appealing to the elites and the economic prosperity of the poor. The RNC picked Alfred M. Keyes, a representative from Maryland. Keyes was both African American and also a Mormon, and the RNC hoped that he could appeal to both the racial minority demographic and the religious demographic. There were even rumors that he was a closeted homosexual, but the RNC hoped that such a diverse candidate could help them wrangle control of the country back. 

But in September of 2000, the internal stability of the United States was challenged when a group of penal farms declared independence under a reformed “Golden Circle of Dixieland”. These neo-confederates were nothing more than drunken racists who were taking out their frustration on racial lines. Still, Uncle Sam puffed up his chest and President Smith mobilized the Armed Forces. Supply lines were slow to move, and in early October 2000, the first reports of “Panther Mauls” came in. The predominantly black penal labor force had organized and risen up against the KKK. From monkeywrenching to fertilizer-based bombs, penal farms across the South were destroyed. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v582kPp43Mg&list=PLw2qu_cqPb-mPzSdT5ml61LSO23OjlgEe&index=41&pp=gAQBiAQB8AUB 

And with it, the United States was hit by its first major famine.

During the Presidential Debates of 2000, both Representative Keyes and President Smith condemned the racial violence in the South. Keyes, as an African American, demanded an immediate end to the hostilities. He said that this violence had erased all the progress of the Civil Rights Movement and the bloodshed was even an affront to God. Smith rebuffed him, saying that he didn’t go far enough. The Union was sacred, and it was only through the country’s combined efforts could America survive. By disrupting the flow of food to the rest of the US, this rebellion was affecting everyone’s lives. 


The Election of 2000

Keyes unsurprisingly lost, as while Smith was becoming disappointing, he was still seen as the better option of the two. Many corporations actually donated to the Smith campaign as he was seen as better for stability, and setting the precedent for stamping out rebellion in penal farms could end up being lucrative. Keyes won his home state of Maryland, took back Montana, and managed to win Utah, Georgia and South Carolina, which had not yet fallen to the racial violence. 

After Keyes conceded on the night of November 9, 2000, he pledged to travel the South in an attempt at calming the chaos. He successfully talked down a group of Panthers outside Rome, Georgia before disappearing. He would later be found by a squad of Kentucky National Guardsmen, hung from a noose and naked. 

January 20th, 2001 was a dreary day. America was tired of struggling. Crime was through the roof, and people were scraping by to pay their bills. Food was being rationed so tightly that soy-based steaks and bread were the only things consistently stocked on shelves. The nation was running out of hope. Graves’s policies had kept the country from shutting down completely, but Smith’s policies didn’t have the revitalizing effects he had hoped they would. The government was barely breaking even before the Second Civil War, and was now drowning in debt. America was sick of being told “just one more day like this, then everything will be better”. 

Smith watched with trepidation as the European Federation slowly became more and more authoritarian. He was worried that soon, the United States would have to take drastic measures to keep itself afloat. Already, cracks were beginning to form in the psyche of the nation. Alabama v. Clifford Smith had opened a nasty can of rotten, radioactive worms, and soon factories all over the country were petitioning to the Department of Justice to use penal labor. This was soon followed by the corporate-friendly governor of Illinois passing the Industrial Preservation Act, which significantly limited the power of unions. It was met by a nationwide strike, and the Governor eventually relented, however the damage was already done. 

President Smith’s last “successful” act as president was the American Mentorship Act, a bill that created a new department of the government, the Department of Mentorship. This new department would hire elderly professors and scholars, many who had been laid off as more colleges closed, to tutor and mentor newer government workers. With literacy rates only declining, these mentors would eventually be known colloquially as “Readers”. 

Smith’s downfall can be traced to August of 2002. Vice President Roy Sanderson was on a now rare overseas diplomatic trip to negotiate the London Agreement on the United State’s behalf. International relations had not improved, and with Turkey having been kicked out the year before, NATO was at each other’s throats. An up-and-coming representative from Virginia, Frederick Sweeney, made an impassioned plea to Congress that Uncle Sam needed help. They were bankrupt, and needed the help of every citizen, both public and private, to make it through this. And rather than welcome these helpful Americans with open arms, Uncle Sam had shackled them with fines and nationalized them. Representative Sweeney was of course referring to the massive financial power of the remaining megacorporations that dominated the food industry. He proposed an amendment to the “Of the People, For the People” Act of 1991 to massively reduce the fines and instead accept donations. Afterall, the government needed help. In the first week of September, the new bill narrowly passed the House of Representatives and was tied in the Senate. The Pro Tempore voted in favor of the act. President Smith could have vetoed the Act, but he ultimately chose not to. He felt that the benefits outweighed the negatives, and that ultimately, he could still help the country. 

He would regret that choice until his death. 

[1] Grave’s running mate in 1984 was Buck Macalester, a centrist Democratic representative from Bakersfield, California. 
[2] In the Glorious Decades, a family was considered poor if they did not own at least five television sets. 
[3] Federal minimum wage was abolished in 1978, though many left-leaning states kept it.
[4] PBS and C-SPAN were revived and merged into one channel in 1989.
[5] Due to acid and chemical rain, many landmarks had been significantly damaged. Abraham Lincoln’s face on the Lincoln Memorial had been weathered in such a way that it seemed like he was closing his eyes and crying. 
[6] Why would the battery manufacturing companies of the world make reusable batteries when they could just simply sell their customers more? 

Section 2: The American Nightmare (2002-2012)
Excerpt from “Corporatism in the 21st Century” by Ciarán Soltán, Man from Mullingar Press, 944 ASJ

The Midterms of 2002 resulted in a dramatic shift in policy. More and more Democratic representatives were being swayed by donations from large corporations. In some smaller cities in the Southwest, ones that had gone almost entirely bankrupt, politicians made deals with the remaining but powerful corporations to keep public services running. A new wing of the Democrats was emerging. Officially, they referred to themselves as the Pragmatists, but many in the New Deal focused Old Guard referred to them as the Corporatists. 

The deliberately vague definition of “donation” given by the “For the People, Of the People” Act of 2002 slowly opened the way for all types of corruption. There were a few cases of bribery and some forgery here and there, but for the most part, the Federal work force was holding the line. Law enforcement suddenly never had the time to investigate, as gang-related violence, rape, and murder were becoming ever-present. 

President Smith, meanwhile, was more concerned with the deteriorating state of the world. Vice President Sanderson had just returned from London and while he was successful at negotiating a peace between FulTec and Food, Inc, the changing political landscape made it a hollow victory. President Smith expressed his condolences to India and Pakistan and condemned the small nuclear war between them, with him comparing the senseless destruction to the Three Mile Island disaster. Smith’s sudden interest in foreign policy was a ploy for him to think of a way to undo the damage of the “For the People, Of the People” Act of 2002. He considered using an executive order but that plan risked impeachment, and the Supreme Court could simply strike him down. 

https://youtu.be/KjAQs39dWXA?si=crFN0fVsRUeMzcDQ 

His attention was caught when the town of Chicago launched a general strike in response to the working conditions in the rusting factories of the Midwest. The strike turned into demonstrations, which turned into protests, which turned into a march down LaSalle Street. Estimates range that 10,000 to 100,000 people marched, and included bus drivers, firemen, and even some of the more principled members of the Chicago Police Department. They were then joined with a group of African American marchers who were protesting the government’s weak response to the racial violence in the South. 

It is not known who started it, but the march turned into a riot as the mob swarmed Chicago City Hall. Rocks were thrown, then bricks, and finally a Molotov cocktail was thrown into the window of the Mayor’s office. The Governor of Illinois mobilized the National Guard - strangely, they were already on standby and quickly rolled into the city in a matter of hours. On October 3rd, 2002, martial law was declared by the Acting Mayor of Chicago. The Illinois National Guard worked with the rest of the Chicago Police Department to sweep the city. Almost 130,000 people were arrested in Chicago that month, some of them part of the riot and some of them for crimes committed while the police were distracted. The chaos died down, but it was like a dam had broken - from then on, Chicago was filled with tension and vapors of rage. 

The Smith Administration’s official position was to leave it up to the state government. In a televised address, President Smith expressed his sympathies for the frustrations of the rioters, but emphasized that only through law and order could these issues be resolved peacefully. He also stated that the federal government’s current priority was stamping out the racial violence in the South. 

As the unrest dissolved into just civil disobedience and the Armed Forces became bogged down fighting a guerilla war between Klan and Panther militias, Smith was hit with another problem - the Southwest was rapidly becoming harder and harder to live in. Already, millions had migrated to the northern, more cooler states, but those that could not move were on borrowed time. Arizona and New Mexico were locked in an almost endless drought cycle, with rationing placing stricter and stricter limits on water. Arizona’s National Guard had been permanently activated in 1997, with New Mexico following suit the next year. Both state’s governments had gone bankrupt in 1999 and were surviving on federal money, but that was quickly drying up. In a meeting with the Governor of Arizona, the Governor of New Mexico, President Smith and the Head of the Department of the Environment[1] in early 2003, the President learned just how bad things were in the Southwest. Crime was almost uncontrollable, unemployment was at a staggering 65%, emergency services were completely overwhelmed, and on top of that, Mexican cartels were exploiting the unemployed and using them to establish a vast black market. The federal government would run out of funds by 2015 trying to keep order in Arizona, and that was assuming the rest of the country didn’t dry up as well. President Smith considered his options, and ultimately, decided to enact the policy of National Triage and declared Phoenix, Arizona unsustainable - effectively abandoning it. All citizens were to evacuate by May 30th, 2003. Temporary housing was being set up in Colorado, but quickly the housing became permanent. 

The Red Summer of 2003 didn’t hit North America as bad as it did hit Europe. President Smith watched the civil unrest in the European Federation with much trepidation, and while he had hoped that Brussels would resolve the matter amicably, he was ultimately not surprised with the severity of the Crackdown. When the Soviet Union and East Germany took over West Berlin, all Smith could spare was a strongly worded letter of condemnation. The United States, barring the Deep South, was overall still being held together, even if it was being held together more out of fear than out of hope. 

As the 2004 Election Cycle began, President Smith endorsed Vice President Roy Sanderson to retake the White House and continue their work. The primaries would result in a different candidate, however - Representative Frederick Sweeney was the one who secured the nomination. He was chosen for his harsh stance on crime, and platformed on “stopping all crime by 2010”. Most of the country, barring the Midwest and the Deep South, was initially skeptical of this until the summer of 2004, when massive heat waves caused gargantuan brownouts due to coal shortages. This was followed by a crime wave that made the 90s look idyllic. As Sweeney campaigned, he blamed President Smith and called him weak and distracted, focusing on trying to make cars run again instead of protecting people. Sweeney even claimed that he had been working on a solution, and in early September 2004, he submitted it to Congress - The Labor and Work Reform Act. With it, he promised to return order to American cities. 

The RNC meanwhile, after trying to find Representative Keyes, ended up running a primary. Mayor for Green Bay, Wisconsin, Charles A. Wyatt, secured the nomination by campaigning on a platform of reducing rationing and trying to “jumpstart” the American Dream. He toured the entire country, stopping in every single state and giving large rallies. He promised that every unemployed American would get a job, and he sounded almost like President Graves.

During the Presidential Debate of 2004, the last televised debate[2], Representative Sweeney made law and order his top priority. He painted President Smith as a weak, ineffectual leader who couldn’t save Chicago, Phoenix or the South. He claimed that President Smith was a smear on the Democratic Party’s history and called him a charlatan. When asked about how the two of them would handle the escalating civil unrest, Mayor Wyatt suggested that he put a cop on every corner. Sweeney said that that wasn’t going far enough - that they needed to nip crime in the bud. He promised that every criminal would be going away for a “long, long time”. 


The Election of 2004

Frederick Sweeney won in a landslide, his talk about stopping crime, while initially vague, resonated with a lot of Americans. Mayor Wyatt conceded the night of the election, and wished President-Elect Sweeney well in his endeavors. The Republicans, despite having such political superstars as Abraham Lincoln and Richard Nixon, were becoming deeply unpopular with the American people. The three states that Wyatt won: Oklahoma, Arkansas and Alaska, he barely won by a slim majority. So many Democratic representatives were elected to Congress that they had a supermajority in both the House and the Senate. 

Later that November, Sweeney’s landmark bill would pass the Senate. President Smith was still too focused on the Southern Violence and the environmental situation in the Southwest to read the bill closely. A few days later though, he tried to reverse course and drafted an Executive Order nullifying the bill. The Supreme Court sided against him, and he spent the rest of his term trying to fight it. 

Just like the “Of the People, For the People” Act of 2002, the Labor and Work Reform Act of 2004 was another nail in the coffin for America. First, there was a total ban on firearms for most citizens. Only people authorized by the federal government could obtain a firearm, such as federal workers, police officers, store owners and landlords. All citizens had to turn in their guns to their nearest National Guard armory by December 31st, 2005. 

Second, following the model of the penal farms in the South, the bloated prison system was being replaced by factories using penal labor. The punishment for crimes were increased to act as a deterrent. Things like fraud, racketeering, embezzlement, burglary, and even something as petty as theft would land criminals in increasingly long sentences in a prison-factory. Murderers and rapists were sent to special high security factories, where they would await a sentencing while slaving away. Most of those incarcerated in actuality would never be seen by a judge, and would be worked to death in some corporate sweatshop making clothes or farming a field. 

Third, all cities with a population of more than 8500 were required to have a curfew from 8:00 pm to 6:00 am. This was to give the Police a chance to tackle the crime rate, and also remove homeless people from the streets. Momentarily, the streets of America became quiet as gangs, drug lords, cartels and mobs were rounded up and sent off to work as chain gangs. 

Just a month later, the first prison-factory was opened in Saint Paul, Minnesota by the Food, Inc. Many companies jumped at this lucrative opportunity, and soon factory workers were fired by the dozens. Factories that were close to bankruptcy started laying off workers left and right and filling up their assembly lines with gangbangers and smugglers. 

The Unions, of course, protested this and launched a general strike in the Rust Belt. However, part of the Labor and Work Reform Act classified striking as a punishable offense. Then, protesting was added to the list of punishable offenses. Soon, masses of unemployed, sweating strikers turned Chicago into a warzone once again. Factories still owned by Unions barricaded themselves inside, and some of them turned into standoffs with the Illinois National Guard. The struggling economy froze in place, as supply lines broke down due to nationwide strikes. 

President Smith’s last days in office were spent trying to repair the delicate supply lines that were keeping America on life support. Entire isolated communities starved to death, while federal water shipments to California were waylaid. The system was falling apart. On January 17th, 2005, with just three days left of office, President Smith suffered a stress-induced heart attack and collapsed in the Oval Office. He was rushed to the Winston Morgan Memorial Hospital and while he made a full recovery, he did not return to the White House. Vice President Sanderson was acting President for those three days, and all he did was coordinate Universal Food Ration shipments and try to keep more Southern cities from rebelling. 

On January 20th, 2005, President Frederick Ulysses Sweeney was sworn in. In his inauguration speech, he expressed his condolences to former President Smith, who was still in a coma. He dedicated his speech to him, and said that while he could handle the stress of wrangling the country back together, President Sweeney could. Sweeney then went on to explain that he was the owner of a telecommunications business in the Glorious Decades, and after the Crash of ‘88, that he fought tooth and nail to keep the company alive for as long as he could. He ended up filing for bankruptcy all the way in 1995. He promised the nation that he would fix the country better than Smith and Graves, but he’d need to fix the crime rate first. 


Frederick Ulysses Sweeney’s Presidential Portrait, 2005

President Sweeney’s first act was addressing the civil unrest in Chicago. He signed an executive order amending the American Unions and Workers Act of 1989, and replacing it with one that significantly curtailed the power of unions by making all American workers join a single, federally controlled union. Working with the Governor of Illinois, Federal troops retook Chicago by burning down factories occupied by Unionist holdouts. Later that week, on January 30th, 2005, President Sweeney said his infamous “strikebreaker” speech on live television and condemned any strikers, rioters and unionists as communist insurgents who were disrupting the very lifeblood of America. It had two meanings, however - the first was an obvious threat against any would-be rebels, but the second was to act as an assurance to the remaining financial titans of America that President Sweeney was on their side. After all, the biggest donations in American political history came from these corporations as a donation to the Sweeney campaign. 

https://youtu.be/BJH1Uolu7io?si=MAOXlEdRr5gPhbGR 

The next day, President Sweeney authorized the withdrawal of all federal troops from the South. Sweeney received widespread condemnation for this, but he rationalized it as a waste of resources. Most of the South was a dry, dusty desert or completely burned down by this point, so Sweeney deflected and claimed to focus on repairing the supply lines and attempting to revive the economy. 

Sweeney had been working with his corporate donors on his Labor and Work Reform Act for several years, and now that Sweeney was in office, there was nothing stopping it. The Smith Administration’s lawsuit was dropped, and Sweeney remained hopeful that the reduction in labor costs would help stimulate the economy out of a depression and into a recession. 

While the National Guard and the militarized police forces rounded up dissidents and sent them to factories, President Sweeney and his Vice President Barty “Hooper” Rogers attempted to curry favor with the government of the Nordic Union. The Nordic Union was considering a referendum for leaving NATO yet again, and while President Sweeney agreed that America was in no position to help her allies, he was still hopeful that that could change. By 2010, he had hoped, America would take her place as the dominant superpower again. 

Sweeney nor Rogers could sway the Nordic Union, and on March 24th, 2005, the Nordic Union of Sweden and Norway would leave NATO. Soon, this set a dangerous precedent and just a few weeks later Canada would leave as well. When the European Federation placed their blockade on the UK, President Sweeney started to plan a mediation between Brussels and London but his corporate donors advised against it, saying that Europe was no longer a worthwhile market after the signing of the London Agreement of 2002. The UK soon left NATO out of protest, and when Washington did not reply to a European request for aid against the UK, the EF left as well. 

By June of 2005, NATO had ceased to exist. 

Sweeney spent most the summer trying to negotiate a treaty of mutual defense with Canada, until at the end of August the American south was devastated with Hurricane Wilson. Several large cities were almost completely destroyed, including New Orleans, Louisiana and Palm Beach, Florida. Given the low-intensity but protracted violence in the South, federal aid could not be sent over land. President Sweeney did authorize a state of emergency in those areas though, and allowed the Coast Guard to assist in surveying the wreckage. 

Hurricane Wilson was estimated to have a death toll of over 40,000, and caused over $5 Trillion in damage. With the government barely scraping by, the decision was made to effectively abandon the southern coast along the Gulf of Mexico. The federal government did however work with Food, Inc to later organize a resettlement program from the devastated gulf region to the cooler (and more suitable for farming) states of Kentucky and Virginia. The displaced citizens were kindly given a job working at the local Food, Inc superfarms. 

Food, Inc, and many other companies, were soon running into a problem - even with the reduction of labor costs due to Sweeney’s bill, they still had to pay for all their other positions. Some of the smaller businesses had even stopped paying employees entirely and compensated them with necessities such as food, water, shelter and air conditioning. This culminated in the landmark case Richardson v. New York, in which the Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that so long as adequate compensation is given, employers could pay their employees in food and water in lieu of a wage. President Sweeney approved of this. In a press conference later that week, he said that it would bring the economy up, make sure employees got three square meals a day, and even teach them a trade. 

Later that year, in February of 2006, President Smith fully recovered from his condition. After seeing the blatant corruption of the Democratic party, he and a few other hardcore New Dealers would leave and form the New Green Party. The Old Green Party had languished in the early 80s after being co-opted by Big Oil to oppose nuclear energy after the Three Mile Island disaster. Smith, who had always cared about the environment and saw through the “greenwashing” of coal and oil, had decided that the Democratic Party had become just as pro-corporate as the dying Republican Party. The Sustainability and Welfare Party, or known to most as the Green Party, would begin campaigning in the Northeast in Smith’s home state of Pennsylvania. 

The first cause that the Green Party championed was the evacuation of Los Angeles, California. The Sweeney Administration had wanted to get an evacuation planned, but there was no room in the budget, and no corporation wanted to foot the bill. Los Angeles was declared “unsustainable” during a freak heatwave in late February, and fires started to ravage the Orange County countryside, uncontested by firefighters. The Green Party, led by Former Presidents Graves and Smith, organized an evacuation of Orange County. While a majority of the remaining corporations had sold out to their shareholders, there were a few in the pacific northwest who still believed in Graves’s cause. Pacifica Shipping, a transportation company that had worked with Graves before to coordinate the Universal Food Ration, offered their fleet of steamers to evacuate as many as 200,000 people from Los Angeles. 

Unfortunately, no good deed goes unpunished, and several of the steamers exploded as they were leaving the city. 23 people were killed and over three hundred were injured, including the CEO of Pacifica Shipping. When the trucks were dropped off at their corporate headquarters in Redding, California, several more exploded and ended up setting the company offices on fire. Howard Johnson, the CEO’s son, filed for bankruptcy in March of that year. 

The vast, corporate controlled media lambasted the evacuation efforts, using it to smear the fledgling Green Party, and then erased it from history. President Sweeney’s only comment was that the goal was noble but the results regrettable. 

Soon afterwards, the Sweeney Administration was beset with the aftermath of yet another devastating hurricane. Hurricane Whittney, an unusually large and long lasting storm, ravaged Hudson Bay and drenched New York City in apocalyptic floods. Food, Inc, Sweeney’s biggest donor, demanded that their headquarter city (and their biggest market) be protected from future cataclysm. Immediately, the Sweeney Administration began auctioning off the contract to build the Hudson Bay Sea Wall. American National, which was the only bank that had not foreclosed yet, bought the contract and the sea wall was to be named after them. The Green Party actually helped the clean up efforts, and this is what established their gradual rise in the Northeast. In February of 2007, the newly elected governor cut the ribbon on the finished American National Sea Bank. 

Other notable events in 2006 included the unraveling of the Warsaw Pact. This made President Sweeney a bit more relieved about the fracturing of NATO, but still he pursued an alliance with Canada, becoming gradually more aggressive. At first, he was worried about the USSR potentially invading Alaska but became more skeptical when the USSR and China became increasingly antagonistic towards each other. Then, on October 4th, 2006, the Emperor of Japan killed himself in ritual suicide. President Sweeney sent the Japanese a letter expressing his condolences, but no reply was even received from the increasingly isolated Japan. 

In 2007, rebellion and civil unrest had mainly died down around the country. The supply lines that were holding America together were strengthening again, and while over two thirds of the workers of America were not paid in wages but in food, it seemed that the country could recover. Summer of 2007 started early. In April, the average temperature in both the South and the Southwest was over 90 degrees. By May, much of Texas was uninhabitable, and on June 21st, 2007, the town of El Paso, Texas was declared unsustainable. The Sweeney Administration strongly urged all Texans to head north of El Paso and into Oklahoma and Arkansas. 

On July 4th, 2007, relations between the USA and Canada took a permanent nosedive when four Canadian border guards, for reasons yet unknown, moved four miles past the border wall [3] station of Blackpool, Quebec into American territory. Some have theorised it was an accident, like Former President Graves. Others, like the director of the CIA, viewed it as intentional, but this did not matter to the American border guards who shot at the soldiers upon sight. Two on each side were killed before the Canadian soldiers ran off towards the wall, alerting their superiors there. The American soldiers didn’t report it, hoping it was just a misunderstanding that would be brushed under the rug soon.

The Canadians didn’t see it that way.

Later that night, as the incident was passed up the chain of command, the Canadian army soon publicly accused the United States of trying to start a war, mobilising their forces near the site of the incident. President Sweeney vehemently denied this in an official statement, saying the soldiers shouldn’t have been breaching American territory and threatened “drastic action” should this continue. This was a bridge too far for the Canadian government - a day later, the Canadian Prime Minister broadcasted a speech on radio, claiming President Sweeney was planning to annex Canada and was jealous of its vast food supplies, and that all Canadians should “get armed and prepare for war”. Following this, forces built up on both sides, and in one of Sweeney’s greatest mistakes, he overreached and deployed a tank division near the town of Champlain, near Blackpool where the incident started.

The Canadian troops at the border, fearful the United States was about to invade, shot at a group of American troops near the wall, who fired back. The border clash led to fifty dead, plummeting relations, and nationwide fears war was imminent. As armies on both sides prepared for war, something unexpected happened - they both began to retreat. A last-minute phone call between President Sweeney and the Canadian Prime Minister led to an agreement to retreat all troops on the Quebecian border in exchange for negotiations for a trade deal later that year, which never panned out, and the grip of the nationalistic Canadian government tightened. The clash highlighted how far US-Canada relations had fallen, and they would never be back to normal again.

On October 2nd, 2007, the nation mourned when Elliot Graves, the 40th President of the United States, passed away from cancer at his farm in Grants Pass, Oregon. Flags around the country were at half mast, with the Oregon capital’s flag remaining at half mast for the rest of the year. President Sweeney, along with former Presidents Clifford Smith and Franklin King, would attend the state funeral in Washington, DC. 

2007 was considered the last “good” year, as in the USA, every year after that was filled with some horrible new disaster. In 2008, literally just a few days into January, did the United States confirm its first reported case of the Red Flu. President Sweeney actually used this as an excuse to outlaw gatherings of more than ten people, but it was never enforced because of how cramped cities had become. The Department of Health, which had been stagnating due to the chronic shortage of advanced medicine supplies, was reorganized into the Department of Sanitation, as that was about the only thing most state governments could manage now - make sure everything is clean, dispose of bodies in a timely manner, and hope for the best. 

2008 was also marked as the year that the agricultural centers of the US, mainly the South and the South West, would dry up completely, never usable again. Farms were slowly moved northwards but they were becoming more and more expensive. A heatwave in April of 2008 destroyed the last functioning superfarm in the South, outside of Charlottesville, North Carolina. The government was footing the bill (the Universal Food Ration was too popular to ever cut), but there wasn’t much else they could do. 

Food, Inc instead proposed using jellyfish blooms as their new filler for their ration. Ration Epsilon, as it was called, was rushed through the FDA to prevent another famine like in 2000. Sweeney’s Secretary of Commerce even allowed the Food, Inc to buy a record number of bankrupt fishing agencies, and soon the Food, Inc had the biggest commercial naval fleet in the world. 

https://youtu.be/whdzP0GHuc4?si=r4MLyFhfFBLvb4PQ 

As the 2008 Election approached, this became the main talking point for the two candidates. President Sweeney, due to his harsh stance on crime and his pro-corporate policies, was secured the nomination by the now majority Corporatist wing of the Democratic Party. The RNC, scrambling to appeal to voters, chose populist Representative James. J. “JJ” Thompson of West Virginia. Thompson attempted to appeal to the cautious miners in West Virginia[4] and the remaining independent farmers in the South, as well as the Rust Belt. He campaigned on a platform of undoing the American Unions and Workers Act of 2005 and amending the Labor and Work Reform Act of 2005 to remove the ban on guns, and as he toured the country, he was getting popular. Rather than risk all their work to be undone, the Corporates behind Sweeney used their vast media influence to spread the idea that both acts were already temporary. President Sweeney said on record multiple times that the acts would be lifted “when they were no longer necessary”. Sweeney had aimed for 2011, but as the days went on, he was becoming less and less sure if that would ever happen. The economy was stagnating despite the advent of free labor, and businesses were having a harder and harder time compensating employees[5]. 


The Election of 2008

On Election Day, the results were announced over the radio. Thompson managed to win only his home state of West Virginia, Tennessee (home to the largest independent farming community) and Mississippi due to the way that Sweeney handled Hurricane Wilson. The Green Party was doing even better though - Jennifer Walker became the Governor of Arizona and the first member of the Green Party to hold a governorship. 

Sweeney’s second term would cause his last hope for a better future to die. As the Red Flu spread across the country (which actually took some time due to how isolated different parts of the country were), more and more people became terminally ill. Yet the vast majority of those infected instead would receive devastating mental impairments and other damage to the nervous system - research was in its early stages before Sweeney pulled the plug, deeming it a waste of resources. In January of 2009, after a lengthy court case, the Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that assisted euthanasia for the terminally ill was legal and not considered murder. Chief Justice Jones actually referenced the Declaration of Independence: “If all other avenues have been exhausted and the only way to happiness and peace is leaving this mortal coil, it is up to the individual to exercise that right.”

In the aftermath of Jefferson v. Cincinnati, in 2009 alone, almost a million weary, broken Americans would end their lives - though the government never made that statistic public. America’s spirit had lost the battle with the Eternal Depression, and fewer people every year had the willpower to make it through the day. Following the Red Flu, a myriad of ancient Siberian plant diseases started to ravage the Midwest and the Rust Belt, forcing President Sweeney to reduce the calorie amount of the Universal Food Ration. 

In 2010, as the nation became more and more nihilistic, there was intense outrage that President Sweeney had made no attempts to undo his two landmark bills. As a result, the midterms in 2010 were marked by the Green Party performing even better, with the Governorships of Hawai’i and New Mexico both becoming Green. 

Sweeney’s Administration kept a close eye on the Second USSR Civil War, worrying that rival factions might try to take over Alaska. Sweeney ordered a pair of nuclear submarines to patrol the Bering Strait, but nothing ever came of it. In the midst of all of this, the city of Portland, Oregon seceded from the United States. Oregon, being the home state of Graves, was staunchly of the New Dealer faction and later followed suit, with parts of Washington and northern California seceding as well. A group of far-left Green Party radicals had gotten elected in various areas around the Northwest in 2008 and then in 2010 had decided that President Sweeney wasn’t serving the country anymore, so they declared independence and started talks about unifying into a new country. They called themselves Cascadia, and operated on a policy of eco-centered socialism. 

https://youtu.be/gApvH1WDr_g?si=M2bZlwtlzdSWHKs- 

The country of Cascadia did not even finish writing their constitution before their leaders were executed on live television and their army surrendered. Unlike the calcifying south, the Northwest was full of now prime real estate for farming. The Sweeney Administration was far more ruthless than the Smith Administration, and sent waves and waves of drafted conscripts into battle despite the high mortality rate. In the battlefields of Oregon, doctors euthanised more patients than they saved. Corporations such as Food, Inc and 4M were allowed to “sponsor” divisions of the Army and any territory they captured was allowed to be used for building a super farm or penal factory. The prisoners were sent off to Idaho where they were separated into different penal farms so that they couldn’t reorganize. 

The Green Party, including Smith, denied any allegations of being involved and condemned the rebels as “un-American malcontents who didn’t represent the ideals of the Sustainability and Welfare Party”. Still, the corporate media painted the Green Party and the rest of the New Dealers as vultures who wanted to remove the last bits of prosperity that America had regained after the Crash of ‘88. 

The Portland Rebellion sent shockwaves through America and was seen by some as a wake-up call. Big corporations like Food, Inc and 4M were taking over the government in real time, erasing the rights of the everyday citizen, and making them foot the bill. A week after the televised execution of Ted Kaczynski and Edward Abbey, the American Volunteer Army would form in Saint Paul, Minnesota. After faking a gas leak in the first Food, Inc prison plant to get the workers to evacuate, the AVA then used stockpiled charcoal to overload the machinery and cause the plant to blow up. 

The message was heard loud and clear and factories across the country began having spontaneous “equipment failures”. The overworked, overstretched and over-militarized police were tasked with catching any would-be AVA bombers. Universal Food Rations were withheld against communities that were suspected of harboring AVA members. Some relented, others starved. 

The deliberate sabotage of farms and factories around the country caused the food supply to dwindle further. Food riots became regular and brutal, with “death by food riot” becoming the most common fatality in the United States. The police and the national guard became indistinguishable, as both shot without warming, and with the production of armor or padding being kept slow so that the rebels couldn’t use it against the government. This was exacerbated further when in summer of 2011, the strongest heat wave recorded yet hit the world and caused entire forests to die off. Plant diseases, forest fires, drought and storms were shutting down farms by the hundreds. Entire towns were wiped off the map due to tornados or fires. This caused yet more people to crowd in the crumbling metropolises. 

The Purple Summer caused the Sweeney Administration and the American Foodstuffs Industry to rethink how they were producing their food. They were running out of jellyfish, and lentil beans had gone extinct due to a plant disease. Richard Holden, Governor of New York, proposed an ingenious idea: use cockroaches as filler. They were hardy, abundant, and rich in protein. In July of 2011, at the height of the Purple Summer, the Sweeney Administration abolished the FDA and let the foodstuffs industry run wild. Soon, everyone was eating bugs, and the riots started to die down in intensity. 

But now they were faced with yet another new problem: steamer trucks, in addition to exploding, were also rather slow, loud and quite easy to rob. Bandits, rebels, Klansmen and Panthers would all rob Food, Inc convoys, and despite the Sweeney Administration sending increasingly well-armed escorts that culminated in the entire 10th Infantry Division and a coal-powered tank, transporting food shipments became too risky. Food, Inc, which had earlier bought out AmRail, switched to solely using trains and boats to transport their shipments. 

And even then, they still ran into problems. After AVA bombed a Food, Inc train yard and nearby food processing factory outside Madison, Wisconsin, the decision was made to have factories that produced high-priority goods like food and clothing be staffed entirely by convicts. If they showed any violent behavior, they were executed on the spot. The few factories and farms that had a non-convict work force (there weren’t many by this point) had to fire their workers and create yet more unemployed, but President Sweeney was assured that it was necessary. 

President Sweeney would spend his final year in office hunting down the members of AVA like it was a game of whack-a-mole. In that final summer, he would commonly be found pacing around the West Wing in a distressed frenzy. Congress considered removing him under the 25th Amendment but instead his Vice President, Barty Rogers, took over his administrative duties. 

Sweeney had become callous and disillusioned with his own power, watching as the cityscape outside the windows of the Oval Office turned stagnant, festering, and sickly. He began cutting more and more programs, and in the summer of 2012, he would authorize the final manned space mission in human history. The last astronaut would look down at the Earth and see the same sickly green hellscape that President Sweeney saw. 

[1] President Smith established the Department of the Environment in his first term to better mitigate the effects of climate change and also document the deteriorating conditions. He pushed for President Graves to implement it during his second term, but Graves replied that he “didn’t know how cities turned to sand” and would leave it to the younger generations. 
[2] The decision was made in 2008 to discontinue televising Presidential debates because many were too poor to afford electricity for their TVs anymore, and viewership had dropped significantly since 1996.
[3] The newly elected anti-American Canadian government in 2004 built a border wall across much of the Canada-US border. It was mainly made of barbed wire and stone, and was built primarily for a show of force.
[4] Workers in West Virginia were paid better and had better hours because a majority of Washington, DC’s coal came from West Virginian mines. 
[5] After Richardson v. New York, many companies began paying their employees in food instead of a wage. Corporations kept reducing the pay to see how low they could go, but after a mass quitting in a Detroit law firm, the compensation stabilized to a barely-livable amount that kept only the most desperate people on. 
Section 3: The Rise of the Managerial State (2012-2026)
Internal report to the President of the United Xhosan Federation, based on research conducted by Amaury Velasqué-Lafontaine and Ciarán Soltán, during the 904 ASJ expedition into Yoosa

https://youtu.be/pOFZDP5anZc?si=Nwfr5e6KVm8Or-BY 

Despite his failure to wipe out crime and resurrect America out of the Eternal Depression, President Sweeney was immensely popular with the remaining political and economic elite - so much so that Food, Inc considered lobbying Congress to repeal the 22nd Amendment. Ultimately, it was decided against it, as the elites were worried that Clifford Smith could get elected for a third term. Frederick Sweeney was given a spot on the Board of Directors of Food, Inc, which would make him obscenely rich, and also given a huge, private ranch outside of Gladstone, Michigan. 

Sweeney could be described as corrupt, yet principled. The same could not be said of his successor. 

The Election of 2012 was notable for being the first election in US history where the Green Party won electoral votes. The GNC nominated Joseph Hill of Hawai’i. Hill was one of the original founding members of the party and was President Graves’s Secretary of the Interior. He campaigned on a platform of expanding environmental regulations, as current projections predicted that Hawai’i would have to be abandoned by 2017. He also campaigned on increasing the Universal Food Ration calorie amount and reforming the FDA. He only won his home state of Hawai’i, but the governors of Washington, Oregon, California and Nevada had all turned Green. 

The RNC was dying, with no new congressmen heading to Washington, DC. The primaries were only run in just three states: Montana, Wyoming and North Dakota. Bill Roemer won the nomination practically unopposed, and campaigned on an aggressive platform of wiping out the “fascism” in DC and calling the sitting members of the Senate “rabble-rousers, Benedict Arnolds and demagogues”. He used a lot of complex, flowery words in his rallies, and that was his downfall - the US educational system had been in freefall ever since 1988, and literacy was declining at such a rate that people born in the Red 
Decades only knew how to read and write a few basic words. Senator Roemer would only win his home state of Wyoming. 

Food, Inc and other mega-corporations pumped billions of dollars into the DNC’s campaign. There were primaries, but the results were rigged for their preferred candidate: Peter Stephen Jarret, Junior Senator of Alaska and son of President Morgan’s Vice President Andy Jarret. The corporate-controlled media viciously attacked Senators Hill and Roemer, making them look corrupt and incompetent. This was contrasted with their portrayal of Jarret, who they paraded as a return to “feel good” Americana and a vague message of wealth and prosperity. In cities across America, posters of Jarret appeared overnight, painting him as a perfect, Adonis-like man who was on the side of the common man. 


The Election of 2012

And it worked - Jarret won the largest landslide in US political history, winning a staggering 532 electoral votes. 


Peter Stephen Jarret’s Presidential Portrait, 2013

Despite his big talk of returning prosperity to America, President Jarret spent his first months in office signing executive orders that significantly curtailed the power of states in the name of “efficiency and unification”. He also disbanded the Select Committee on the Enforcement of Servile Rights, and removed many of the rights that were granted to immigrants and refugees, including the suspension of birthright citizenship. 

The repression began with the El Paso Massacre of May, 2013. Texan National Guardsmen brutally rounded up and murdered the entire population of immigrant refugees. The exact number of killed Mexicans is unknown, as the Jarret Administration denied any and all involvement. The National Guardsmen were never court martialed and the Alliance of Nations, now just a few dozen nations barely scraping by, had far too much on their plate to even respond. 

https://youtu.be/UWnE9sCJEgw?si=w4QsKUO9ZtHSx3Qp 

People protested at the government, but by this time “protesting” had turned into “industrial sabotage bordering on domestic terrorism”. Food, Inc’s main production plant in Hartford, Connecticut was destroyed in an armed revolt when the incarcerated laborers overwhelmed the guards and overloaded the under-maintained and over-worked 60 year old machinery. It was suspected that AVA had given the convicts the guard’s schedules and had even given them improvised explosives. 

An investigation conducted by the now miniscule FBI determined that a National Guard Armory outside of Springfield, Massachusetts had been raided, and the Jarret Administration started giving important penal factories and superfarms protection from local military bases. The Safeguarding American Resources Act of 2013, passed in November that year, integrated the Army into the security of Food, Inc production plants. It also merged the National Guard into the municipal police forces of the largest metropolises of each state. These new enhanced police forces answered directly to the governor. Most governors by this point were either fiercely Corporatists or New Dealer Greens. Several Green Party Governors considered consolidating their National Guard and Army forces into an army to rebel against Washington, but in the states where the Green Party had the most power, they had far more pressing matters at hand.

In the Winter of 2013, supply lines were further crippled as trains were constantly breaking down and fuel shortages forced superfarms to distribute their food to the closest city near them. Demand was so incredibly high that stores and ration depots could not be backstocked. Around Thanksgiving of 2013, after President Jarret held a lavish (by 2013 standards) turkey dinner at the White House attended by some of the most prominent economic and political elite, riots in Washington, DC resulted in a swarm of starving, unemployed vagrants breaking into the White House grounds. A contingent of Marines stopped them, but the violence was getting out of hand. 

The Jarret Administration assured their donors and supporters that something like that would never happen again, and that the President was working on a special way to mitigate the worst of the riots. In January 2014, the Jarret Administration unveiled the “Scraper” - a construction vehicle retrofitted by AAM to run on coal dust. The Scraper would use their huge buckets to ‘scrape’ rioting civilians and deposit them in the large container on its back. 

Even as lethal force became more and more common, it did not deter the most desperate of the rioters. The Scrapers helped but food riots had become vicious battlefields. The AVA bombings slowed down but did not stop. In March 2014, the Jarret Administration started to remove the Universal Food Ration in areas that were prone to rebellion. The governors of these areas, working closely with the federal government, offered rewards of food in exchange for information of AVA bombers and rebels. 

A huge number of Food, Inc factories had been damaged by April of 2014, and President Jarret became concerned about keeping his armed guards, donors and supporters in Washington, DC fed. The US had run out of a vast majority of resources and needed to turn to other sources. The Jarret Administration authorized Food, Inc to commandeer the remaining ships in the US Navy and survey the anarchic coasts around the world. They were given near-total control of the Navy’s assets but were advised to not enter the Pacific, as Australia and New Zealand had been extremely militaristic and had wiped out the entire PLA Navy Fleet in just a few hours. Japan was also just as gun-ho with their military after rearming during the Third Sino-Japanese War. 

Latin America and South America were considered, as many of the islands in the Caribbean were practically abandoned. Cuba was a wasteland of continually flooded coasts and cities destroyed by storms, and the surrounding islands, including Puerto Rico[1], were hauntingly empty as entire buildings had been pulled out into the sea by the winds. Mexico and their territories in Central America were in a constant state of civil war between the various cartels and the far-left dictatorship in Mexico City. Cartels in Gran Colombia and anarchists in Venezuela had recently provoked a civil war between the Sao Paulo and Rio factions of the fascist Brazilian Empire. The Democratic People’s Republic of Argentina, who had seized the remains of Chile, Paraguay, Uruguay and parts of Bolivia, was far more stable than anywhere south of the Mason-Dixon line. The Argentine Navy was using old Warsaw Pact era submarines, and they were flying a distinctively communist flag[2]. The head of the Food, Inc Convoy, Admiral Coulson, considered hailing the patrolling vessels, yet the only response they received was a warning shot. 

The Convoy moved to the coast of southern Africa and saw that the only areas that had useful resources were controlled by a distinctively far-right regime. In a secure satellite conference between the Board of Directors and Admiral Coulson, various board members debated making contact with this extremist regime. It was quickly decided that negotiating for resources would take far too long, and they were already running out of their borrowed time. Around late May, the Convoy arrived on the coast of the Indian subcontinent. The lands that had once been India and Pakistan had been thoroughly depopulated as a result of apocalyptic famines, drought and the nuclear war. 

While the US had an enormous surplus of 225 million unemployed citizens who’d do basically anything to feed their families, transporting workers to India would be too costly to carry out. So the Food, Inc representatives made a deal with the numerous city states along the coast: bring us scrap metal and leftover machinery, and in exchange the Indian scavengers would be paid in the corporation’s brand new product. 

This was where the US government and Food, Inc truly gave in to their inner depravity to meet the bottom line and keep their eroding power. They had tried just about everything to keep their populations fed and maintain a facade of stability: tofu-based imitation food, jellyfish and junk fish, cockroaches and insects. The CIA had confirmed via satellite photos and intercepted radio messages that China had resorted to industrialized cannibalism in 2012, and the European Federation the year afterwards. Many in Congress and the Board of Food, Inc (which was slowly becoming a circle as opposed to a Venn diagram), were reluctant to go down that route, but some vocal members claimed that they didn’t have a choice to keep their population under control. In an emergency, top-secret session between the Jarret Administration Cabinet and the Board of Food, Inc, a compromise was reached and this last-ditch effort of industrialized cannibalism was to be tested out in India. For the more ruthless members of the Board, this had been the goal of the expedition all along and had conveniently placed the necessary equipment in the cargo bays of the ships. The equipment was divided evenly between several of them so as to avoid suspicion from the crew. 

The “payments” were initially small, but as more scavengers succumbed to radiation poisoning and their supplies increased, so did the payments. The “Indian Exchange” allowed the Food, Inc to experiment with just how efficiently they could process a human body. The Scavengers would usually die an accelerated death due to the toxins in the prototype Ration Omega, but this was blamed on the radiation and the Navy medics euthanized them painlessly. Their next of kin were always given some Ration Alpha (reproposed tomato extract) and Ration Beta (a combination of potatoes and several grains) in addition to the Ration Omega to allay suspicion. 

https://youtu.be/BlnVP2_dIb4?si=2NMDlp2bYPKGsK2c 

Back home, AVA no longer the only domestic rebel group: in winter of 2014, the Pilgrims formed after a meeting on December 4th, in Boston, Massachusetts. The Pilgrims were even more dedicated than AVA: instead of merely disrupting production sites, the Pilgrims began targeting resources indiscriminately. Forests were razed to the ground, rail lines were cut, and individuals were targeted directly by starving people with nothing left to lose. During the midterms of 2014, an overwhelming amount of local and state governments in the Northeast had turned Green, and after the attempted assassination of a prominent Democratic representative from Maine, the Jarret Administration authorized an official investigation into the Green Party. Jarret’s Secretary of Justice accused the GNC of aiding the Pilgrims, and conducted a recount of many local elections in New England. Coincidentally, it was found that many of the state-level positions had actually gone to Democratic representatives in a landslide, and the GNC illegally tampered with votes. 

Former President Smith, who was now Chairman of the GNC, denied any allegations of collaborating with the Pilgrims. In the congressional hearings throughout the early months of 2015, the Jarret Administration and the GNC reached an agreement that Clifford Smith was to resign as Chairman in exchange for assurances that the Democratic government wouldn’t completely dismantle the GNC. 

As shipments of minimally radioactive precious metals began to be shipped in from India, throughout the rest of 2014 the Food, Inc began looking into using algae as a filler for their products. The Indian Experiment had shown them that cannibalism was useful only as a last resort. Using finely tuned specialized nets, algae could be collected and turned into a sort of green slurry which could be used to supplement the dwindling supply of vegetables. This was only in the conceptual stages, but as the Food, Inc Navy made trips between India and the United States they tested using algae. Ration Gamma, named after the blue-green hue of the cracker, was made from a mix of algae and seaweed. It proved immensely costly to produce, but even then, it was still the cheapest alternative. In the start of 2015, Food, Inc began an oceanological survey to find the best places to harvest plankton and algae. 

In summer of 2015, the first Great Heatwave hit the world. This was considered by many scientists to be the final deathblow to the US agricultural industry, which was already on its last legs. The entire southern half of the continental United States cooked in the heat, and dreadfully dry winds reached as far north as Alaska. The last vegetation around the Great Lakes dried up and soon the Rust Belt was a cracked, desertified wasteland. Hawai’i was declared unsustainable on October 1st, 2015. In actuality, the Jarret Administration wanted to dismantle the stranglehold the Green Party had over the state. Food production became so slow that the last emergency federal reserves of the Universal Food Ration were exhausted across the entire country. 

President Jarret declared a state of emergency, and temporarily suspended the Universal Food Ration. He knew that he’d need to think of a solution and fast before facing total revolt. Until the heatwave ended and the famine subsided, until more parts from India arrived, until more efficient methods of algae collection were developed… The United States had no other choice than to risk total collapse. In a top secret emergency session of Congress, on July 11th, 2015, the Jarret Administration approved Project Omega. Officially, it was recycling human corpses to be used as fertilizer to increase crop yield during the famine, but only the President (and Food, Inc) knew the full extent. As the heatwave showed no sign of stopping, Project Omega was extended to 2016. Then a secret NASA report claimed that unless a huge amount of people died, 97% of the planet would be unable to support human life by 2030 and Project Omega became indefinite. 

On August 30th, 2015, the very first shipment of Ration Omega reached American shelves. Food riots decreased in severity, but for the most part, everyone was still barely hanging on. Police forces were so exhausted that they were reduced to using ancient, mothballed equipment from the Prohibition Era and in some cases football equipment. The Universal Food Ration was slowly re-implemented in December, with the calorie ration initially small but increasing as the supply of crops increased again, supplemented by Ration Omega. 

Ration Omega was only good if the death rate was much higher, so the Jarret Administration expanded death benefits. For citizens that passed away, their next of kin were practically rewarded, and euthanasia became so popular that the Department of Hospitals began to start designing clinics for the sole purpose of euthanasia. The first Euthanasia Clinic opened in New York City on April 9th, 2016, and just in time: as predicted earlier by NASA, the summer of 2016 was plagued by yet another Great Heatwave. In places as far north as Washington, DC, the sun was so harsh that entire states became nocturnal for half of 2016. 

President Jarret became worried that the “Doomsday Collapse” in 2030 was coming sooner than expected. He began plotting contingency plans with his closest supporters in Congress. Alaska was projected to be part of the 3% land to support human life, so the federal government began slowly and subtly diverting resources to Alaska. A series of bunkers were planned to be built but construction would be extremely slow. 

As the election of 2016 neared, the Jarret Administration, faced with extreme resource shortages, a gargantuan population and rampant illiteracy, made the decision to rig the election in the Northeast and Rust Belt. Votes were no longer counted after Jarret and his Corporatist Democratic allies got the lead. Officially, it was a way of speeding up the election process, but it was the first step of removing the last vestiges of democracy. 

In the other parts of the country, the elections were still free but the media once again portrayed President Jarret as the superhuman man who had saved the United States from famine in 2015 and 2016. Jennifer Walker, the Governor of Arizona and the new Chairwoman of the GNC, platformed on an aggressively populist agenda of creating sustainable farming practices instead of intensive agriculture. She toured the Rust Belt and the Northeast (unaware of the election practically being predetermined) and explained in great detail the horrific conditions of the Southwest. 

The RNC, still barely holding on in the north-midwest, selected Benjamin Gilmore of Nevada. They had hoped that reaching out to the Southwest would steal votes away from the Greens. Gilmore used very simple words and platformed on returning rights to states. Unsurprisingly, a lot of the Southwest cared more about drinking water than state’s rights. However, all the momentum that Gilmore was gaining elsewhere evaporated when President Jarret revealed that in 1972 the Nixon Administration had broken into the DNC headquarters to get an advantage in his campaign. This shocked the last few hardcore Republicans, and they mainly voted Green in protest. 


The Election of 2016. Hawai’i’s votes were given “in exile”. 

The Election of 2016 was the first election that the Republican Party won no electoral votes. Gilmore did not even win his home state of Nevada. Governor Walker did slightly better, gaining both New Mexico and Arizona. The 16 Republican Representatives in the House won by default as they were unopposed. In the Senate, the RNC had no power. 

https://youtu.be/HHPZynI6pwQ?si=ysvT4gimokLjYlar 

With Jarret’s power secure once again, he immediately resumed solidifying his control. Using Executive 
Orders, he cut as many social services as he could. The Department of Welfare was reduced to only the Universal Food Ration. The National Relief was abolished, along with NASA. The remaining national monuments began to be sold off to collectors. The official story was that they were being transferred to Alaska. 

As more social services were cut, the intensity of riots increased, so instead Jarret sold off the rusting US Air Force. Food, Inc bought some of them for their corporate security division, while other companies bought them to break them down for parts. This was followed by auctioning off the rusting NASA equipment baking in Houston, and finally, repealing a whole slew of antitrust and anti-monopoly laws. Food, Inc, after being nationalized and broken up by the federal government back under Graves, was now finally free again. Food, Inc began buying up their competitors left and right, some of them including Jarret’s donors. The Greens and Republicans protested the entire time, but the Democratic Supermajority shut down any investigation. 

Throughout 2017 and 2018, as the resistance towards Jarret only grew, the Food, Inc began bribing huge amounts of Green Party representatives to sway them to their side. Their message was that it was too late to save most of the United States, and that if they wanted themselves and their families to live, they’d need to follow the plan. Most were skeptical, but as the months dragged on and the conditions deteriorated further, the Green Party slowly became just as corporatist as the Democratic Party. The Republican Party was viewed as almost extinct so Food, Inc did not extend the same offer. By the Midterms of 2018, almost the entire Party was on their payroll. The few remaining politicians with a spine stayed in the party, but always abstained from voting. 

In late 2018, to distract the enraged population, President Jarret began playing a game of political chess with Canada over the ownership of the Great Lakes. Ottawa and Washington went back and forth between declaring war on each other and chickening out. Both countries had huge aquatic parades in the Great Lakes, showing off their rusting equipment. Jarret was careful to always back down well before the potential of actual violence emerged. 

The parts from India were slowly running out, and in case another wave of terrorists destroyed Food, Inc Plants (AVA had slowly became more and more disillusioned due to the hopeless conditions) President Jarret decided to allow the CIA to destabilize the little order Mexico had left. Soon the Cartels were fighting each other in addition to the junta in Mexico City. 

Both of these actions gained swift condemnation in the form of the Pilgrims ramping up their operations. By 2020, several prominent Democratic politicians were killed in mob violence, a term the Pilgrims called “tarring and feathering”. Former President Smith was accused of being involved in one of these chaotic executions and was placed under house arrest for the rest of Jarret’s second term. 

In 2019, Food, Inc finished their Oceanographic Survey and the results were horrifying. Not only was algae-based food unsustainable, but the oceans were dying off at a rate much, much faster than previously thought. At the current rate, the oceans would be incapable of supporting any life at all by 2039. 

With this information, Jarret accelerated his plans. The contingency plan, called Operation: Eagle’s Nest, began to be set in motion. It was later expanded to include the secret recolonization of Hawai’i for the very rich, with underground bunkers filled with air conditioning, desalination, automatic algae collection and hydroponics facilities. 

President Jarret started selling off huge tracts of land to the rich and privatizing large amounts of federal land. And it wasn’t just arable land, either. Mountains were sold off to be destroyed in strip mining and lakes were privatized. This received massive pushback until water was included in the Universal Food Ration. Then, he pushed a bill through congress that mandated that every single city have a minimum of one euthanasia clinic per 10,000 people. He would later enshrine assisted suicide as a constitutionally protected right in the 30th Amendment. 

By the election cycle of 2020, even if the crumbling federal government decided to repeal the 22nd Amendment and have President Jarret (or even President Sweeney) run for a third term, those in power knew that the remaining politically active citizens would abstain from voting in general. Many had become disillusioned with the Greens as well, and the tiny number of politicians with their morals left had all become independent. The country was barely hanging together: famines, drought, desertification, civil unrest, and outright rebellion. Any hope of getting out of the Eternal Depression had long since dried up, most people were just trying to eke out an existence for as long as they could before Seeking God. 

For those in power, they knew that their time was running out. They could not save every American. Some of them wondered if they could even save themselves. Everything was running on fumes. Entire cities had been abandoned, and every day more factories would permanently shut down due to irreparable technical issues. A few in the Board of Food, Inc and the President’s Cabinet believed that their only avenue left was to wipe the slate clean and start over. 

But in order to calm the population, they would need to give them hope. 

This is where the DNC made the unusual decision to seek out President Smith’s VP: Roy Sanderson, the independent governor of Maine. Governor Sanderson was fully aware of the current political state of the United States, and knew where all the DNC’s money was coming from, but he believed that using the Executive Power that came with the Oval Office that he could mitigate the damage. The DNC ensured that he primaried unchallenged, and as the campaign trail picked up, Governor Sanderson platformed on policies to revive the welfare state and reinstate many of President Graves’s and Smith’s efforts to increase standard of living. He picked James Dent, a DA from New York, to be his VP. 

For the GNC, John Sanford, the Governor of Colorado, secured the nomination. He was one of the many Greens to jump ship during the midterms of 2018, and ran on a platform similar to Sanderson’s but with more of a focus on environmental issues. However, his brand of environmentalism was far more right-wing than previous GNC presidential campaigns. He called for drafting up the unemployed to be “soldiers” in the “war against hunger”, and to completely close off all immigration. 

The RNC was all but extinct, and the mayor of a small California town, Calvin Walsh, tried to run on a platform of breaking up the monopolies in Washington, DC. He also tried to form an alliance with the GNC, unaware of their shift to corporate pandering, and campaigned with them throughout the Southwest. Governor Sanford even promised Mayor Walsh to be his Vice President, but rescinded the offer a week before the Election. 


The Election of 2020

On November 4th, 2020, it was announced over radio that Roy Sanderson had won the Presidency. This surprised Sanderson, who was shocked at how fast the votes were tallied. In the end, the Republican Party had only 11 Representatives in Congress, the Green Party had a staggering 65, and the Democrats held 353 seats. The remaining six representatives were Independents, the last of the New Dealers. The Senate had 87 Democratic Senators and 13 Green Senators, mainly concentrated around the Southwest and Northeast. 

Jarret spent the rest of his term away from the public eye, overseeing the implementation of Operation: Eagle’s Nest. After a meeting of the Alliance of Nations in Bern, Switzerland, the remaining nations[3] all shared their reports on the drastic decline of the climate around the world. Although no one openly spoke of it all, all the world leaders knew that very soon, unless something changed, humanity would likely be extinct by 2100. East Germany proposed the idea of living in harmony with nature, while Japan advocated for mandatory population control policies. Soon, the various delegates were engaged in a shouting match, with each of them blaming the others for the state of the world. In the end, it went nowhere. 

On January 20th, 2021, President Roy Sanderson was sworn in. It was estimated that only 3500 people attended. Despite his attempts at a rousing speech, promising a return to the glory days of President Graves and FDR, the entire nation’s spirit had been broken and it seemed nothing could fix it. Everyone was either apathetic, numb, or full of rage. 


Roy Sandersons’s Presidential Portrait, 2021

In his first day in office, President Sanderson signed a slew of Executive Orders, such as undoing the “Of the People, For the People” Act of 2002, re-implementing the National Relief System, lifting Former President Smith’s house arrest, and began the process of investigating and breaking up the remaining corporations that held so much power. Unsurprisingly, the Supreme Court decided that each of these Executive Orders were unconstitutional and that President Sanderson had no power to enact such radical restructuring of the current political system. 

Present Sanderson of course appealed to the Supreme Court, but ultimately, it went nowhere. The official ruling was that, because of the colossal decrease in tax revenue due to the staggering 47.8% unemployment rate, the corporate donations from the “Of the People, For the People” Act of 2002 was the only thing keeping the government functioning. 

So in March, President Sanderson looked to other avenues to increase the quality of life of the average American. He submitted a bill through Congress that increased the calorie ration of the Universal Food Ration and also doubled the amount of water one could obtain, though only the water increase went through. In April, he attempted to reinstate the FDA, but it didn’t even make it to the Senate. In June, he tried to create an initiative to research more resource-effective ways of farming, yet that didn’t pan out either. 

His attempts at undoing the damage of the previous two administrations was seen as commendable, and caused the various terrorist and rebel groups around the country to momentarily subside their destabilization efforts. The Pilgrims actually endorsed President Sanderson, and vowed to stop all operations in Maine. As a show of good faith, President Sanderson sent Vice President Dent to negotiate an official end to all terrorist involvement of the Pilgrims and their dissolvement. However, after the Vice President was held hostage and almost executed, President Sanderson had no choice but to follow in the path of his predecessors and engage in a ruthless campaign to stomp out the Pilgrims and the remnants of AVA. He would find this easier than then two previous administrations, as a vast majority of AVA and the Pilgrims had become burnt out and disillusioned, with many of them dying in suicide bombings or simply Seeking God. 

In the Summer of 2021, due to the increase of the water allowance in the Universal Food Ration, a severe drought occurred in the Great Plains. This cascaded into another famine, and it was then that the President learned the horrible truth of what the vast majority of the population was actually eating. President Sanderson, back when he had been the Green Party Senator for Maine, had voted to authorize “Project Omega” during the Great Heatwave of 2015. He was told that it was merely the recycling of human corpses for fertilizer, and that it was only a temporary measure. But as his Chief of Staff told him, Project Omega was actually recycling human flesh to supplement the dying superfarms. 

In July of 2021, Sanderson made the unpopular decision to reverse his decision of increasing the water ration. He did not give an official reason, only that it was “unproductive in the long term”. In reality, he wanted to minimize the amount of Ration Omega being made. This was where the Board of Food, Inc realized that President Sanderson might not be the peaceful figurehead they needed to carry out their plans. 

Despite not being officially involved in the federal government anymore, Former President Jarret was still working very closely with the Democratic Party and the Board of Food, Inc to carry out Operation: Eagle’s Nest. While President Sanderson was dealing with the fallout of the Great Drought of 2021 and stamping out rebel groups, the Department of American Continuity continued their work. The Department was made in secret in January of 2021, right before President Sanderson was sworn in, and was classified as a government contractor so it was viewed as completely independent. Agents of the Department worked closely with Food, Inc to obtain biological samples of staple crops and went to great lengths to freeze embryos of important livestock such as chickens, cows, and sheep, where they were then covertly transported to vaults in Hawai’i and Alaska. The very rich not in on the conspiracy began to notice a sharp decline of availability in the already shrinking livestock market. The diversion of healthy crops to these vaults also began to cause gradual but widespread food shortages throughout the country. 

President Sanderson suspected something was happening, and while he did not even trust most of his cabinet, he still had a few friends in high places that still had their consciences. He entrusted these close allies (mainly Green mayors and the former CEOs of companies that had been bought out by Food, Inc) to relay any information they found on why large amounts of healthy crops were disappearing and not arriving at ration factories. Personally, Sanderson believed it was the work of roving bandits and hungry workers. In an attempt to reduce the likelihood of workers rebelling, he tried to reinstate protections on the worker’s rights, but with no way to enforce it, the Supreme Court struck it down. 

By October of 2021, the famine and drought had evened out. In an attempt to prevent something similar from happening again, President Sanderson requested a meeting with the Prime Minister of Canada. Here, he apologized for the jingoistic nature of his predecessor, and hoped that the United States and Canada could once again be close trading partners. In private meetings with the Canadians, he was quite honest and explained just how bad the living situation had gotten in the United States. He practically begged them for food, aid, water, anything they could spare: but his pleas fell on deaf ears. The Canadians believed that the Dying Eagle to their south had nothing to offer them. If anything, it further emboldened the nationalistic government. 

Meanwhile, the Second Mexican Civil War had spilled over into the American Southwest. Cartels and fleeing refugees crossed the border, usually to end up frying in the ever-expanding Chihuahuan Desert. President Sanderson sent federal troops to attempt to turn back the refugees, but this only resulted in more death as cartels began to engage in armed conflict with the American troops. The eco-populist Green Party used this as a rallying point, and engaged in a costly, bloody war to drive out the Mexicans from American territory. The Night War, as it was called, was named so as being the first major war to be fought entirely at night due to the scorching temperatures. It was estimated that over a million would die from UV exposure and heat stroke alone, with less than 50,000 soldiers on both sides dying from actual combat. 

Domestic refugees, fleeing from the war, would end up in Denver, Colorado. This overwhelmed the already stretched-thin government resources, and led to the Black Winter of 2022. Water shortages reached an all-time high and culminated in a gargantuan dust bowl that stretched from Crescent City, California, all the way to Omaha, Nebraska. Things were so bad that daily rations were reduced to weekly rations, which led to increasingly brutal and violent food riots. But soon, many became too malnourished to put up a fight. It is estimated that over 40 million people would die from the Black Winter of 2022. 

On July 31st, 2022, the Sanderson Administration made the decision to declare Denver, Colorado, unsustainable. Much of the Southwest fell to anarchy barring tiny, isolated enclaves of order. Strangely, the Governor of Colorado and 2020 Presidential Candidate John Sanford seemed unconcerned by the rapidly deteriorating situation in the southern half of America. 

Then on August 1st, 2022, President Sanderson received an encrypted message to meet someone at the Lincoln Memorial. Sanderson attended the meeting alone, as in late 2021 the decision was made to make residency in Washington, DC available only to members of the government and other high-ranking members of the political and economic elite. 

It was here that President Sanderson, in the shadow of Lincoln, met a man named David Sturges. Sturges was the last Commissioner of Food and Drugs before the FDA was dissolved, and claimed that Food, Inc was “up to something big”. Sanderson replied that he already knew the truth about Project Omega. Sturges insisted this was something different, that he knew where the vast amounts of missing food shipments were going. He produced a worn, yellowed envelope and handed it to President Sanderson only for a muffled gunshot to ring out. Suddenly, Sturges was choking on his own blood and slumped over on the weathered throne of Lincoln. “Eagle’s Nest” was all he could get out before succumbing to his injuries. 

Secret Service agents surrounded the President and claimed that he was in danger. His personal bodyguard claimed that agents of the Pilgrims had infiltrated Washington, DC, and were trying to lure him out to be assassinated. He was then told to ignore anything David Sturges had said, as he was a known collaborator for AVA. As the President was searched for any “injuries”, the envelope was seized and was never seen again. The last glimpse Sanderson had of it revealed the title: “NASA Environmental Report 2017”. 

From then on, the President was surrounded at all times by members of the Secret Service. President Sanderson was practically under house arrest in the White House, while his Vice President James Dent attended any sessions of congress (which were few by this point). Those truly in power, namely Governor Richard Holden, Former President Jarret, Governor Witt Myrow and District Attorney Dean Williamson, made sure to create some semblance of decorum and tried their best to make Sanderson’s time in the White House as comfortable as possible. He was President of a Country in Name Only, and the only thing that kept him in office were fears of a third civil war if he was removed. President Sanderson was still briefed on the daily state of the nation, and he played along with their charade. He was effectively a mouthpiece for the Corporatist agenda. 

By December, Sanderson was trusted enough to leave the White House, although he still had Secret Service liaisons with him at all times. He had learned that while under “executive protection” the federal government had completely rigged the midterms, ensuring that only politicians that could be trusted would now be in Washington, and the few representatives that had a conscience would be out of office by 2024. 

The first cabinet meeting he attended since August was about the drastic famine conditions plaguing the country. Even with Project Omega to supplement the dwindling food supply, it was still not enough. People were dying by the millions every month. Workers in factories and farms were collapsing from exhaustion. Malnutrition was weakening the immune system of just about everyone, and something as simple as a cold was now lethal. 

With this, Sanderson fell into a deep depression. Everything President Graves, President Smith and himself had achieved was for nothing. There really was no hope. Everyone was simply waiting for death to arrive. Sanderson would be frequently found staring off into space, or pacing around the White House in a slow, deliberate manner. Occasionally, the cabinet would bring him bills to sign, which he signed without even looking at. 

In January of 2023, the famine had gotten so bad that even the very rich had to cut back on food. Those in power debated back and forth about what to do, and ultimately decided that the only solution was to reduce the amount of mouths to feed. They would need to come up with a suitable excuse to get the population to go along, however. This was where the American Bounty Act was created. The State Parks, which had actually been sold off during the Jarret Administration, were turned into intensive farming operations with the sole purpose of working as many people to death as possible. “Lotteries” were to be drawn up and only people with no families left would be chosen to “work” there. All they needed was the President to rally the nation to their own deaths. 

On February 15th, 2023, President Sanderson would have his infamous “Seeking God” speech. Sanderson’s handlers of course had prepared a speech for him, and he followed it for the most part. It was only the mention of “worse things to come” that wasn’t part of the script. The few Republicans in Congress drafted articles of impeachment but in the end, nothing happened to it. 

President Sanderson was once again confined to the White House, and received only vague mentions of the goings on in the outside world. The last of the Klan holdouts had been wiped out by the Panthers, and the Second Civil War had officially concluded. The largest hurricane ever recorded devastated the South, reaching as far inwards as Tennessee. Reports were coming in that in East Germany, the National Communist government was getting increasingly militaristic towards both the USSR and the European Federation. 

On February 19th, 2024, the 41st US President, Clifford Smith, passed away from pollution-related causes in his private residence outside of Eagle Lake, Maine. President Sanderson attended the state funeral, and that was the last public appearance he made during his term. Sanderson was viewed as unreliable and was regulated to only a figurehead, with an emergency bill was passed to cede all his executive power to Vice President Dent. As he would walk through the desolate streets of Washington, DC (all his allies had passed away or were killed, so the Ruling Cabinet allowed to him a small degree of freedom), occasionally, he would see some of the 13 Stone Men - the 10 Republican and 3 independent representatives - give him furtive glances. 

By May of 2024, the Ruling Cabinet decided that there was no point in hiding things from him anymore, as their plans were already set in motion: by 2030, the federal government had planned to completely relocate to Fairbanks, Alaska and leave the rest of the country to starve. Already, he had noticed, Washington DC was becoming emptier by the day. 

In the Summer of 2024, water supplies got so low that for the first time, water riots caused more deaths than food riots. The police used lethal force to suppress the violence, and in places like Chicago, New York and Seattle, entire buildings burned down in the chaos. People began dying of dehydration in addition to starvation, and the police, national guard, and army saw record numbers of desertions. 

The Department of American Continuity, headed by Governor Richard Holden and Former President Peter Jarret, had already determined the results of the 2024 election. The last of the rebel organizations had been mostly stamped out, and it was just a handful of one-eyed monsters leading a country of blind, soulless husks. Members of Graves’s and Smith’s cabinets began to disappear, and then CEOs began to die mysterious deaths. The 13 Stone Men all suddenly resigned and were never seen again. 

President Roy Sanderson, the last man with a conscience in Washington, DC, decided that he had nothing left to lose. On the night of January 9th, 2025, Sanderson would force his way into the broadcasting room of the FCC and attempt to send out a message on the Emergency Broadcast System to call upon American citizens to rise up and take back their country from the Corporatists who had betrayed them. 

The EBS had long since been disabled, as the threat of external war had subsided with the collapse of civilization around the world. Sanderson was found at 6:49 AM, still rambling into the headset about Paul Revere. Acting President James Dent, who had sold out to Food, Inc long ago, only shook his head. President-Elect Holden, who was preparing to move into the White House, chastised Sanderson. “And what would that accomplish? There is nothing left for us here. The United States died on February 28th, 1972. We took great strides to make your stay in the White House comfortable, an effort that was clearly wasted.” 

https://youtu.be/8RMdWCz8P-Q?si=8hkQQdI1fc6N97v8 

Governor Richard Holden was president in all but name, being the richest man alive and the primary donor to the Democratic government since 2003. He lambasted President Sanderson as a corrupt and unhinged leader, and ensured that Sanderson would not have a hand in politics after January 20th, 2025. 

Sanderson would never return to the White House. He was instead transferred to a small, dingy apartment in Georgetown, and was watched constantly by Secret Service members for “his own protection”. He was told that if he tried anything like that again, the “entire country” would know about how he signed off on Project Omega and what it really entailed. 

Sanderson was found dead outside of his house on March 18th, 2025. The cause of death was unknown. 


Richard Holden’s Presidential Portrait, 2025

Richard Holden was sworn in on January 20th, 2025, though in practice he had been running the country all the way back since November 9th, 2022. His inauguration was attended by only 37 people, including Former Presidents Jarret and Sweeney, former Vice President James Dent, and the chairman of the GNC, John Sanford. 

On his first day in office, President Holden declared a “National Agricultural Emergency” and used eminent domain to gain access to huge swathes of land. In his first speech as President, Holden blamed the woes of the United States on Canada, who he described as “hoarding enough food to feed China”. 

The Department of American Continuity ramped up their operations significantly. The last dairy farms in the Midwest were relocated to Alaska, and anyone not connected to Operation: Eagle’s Nest with even a modicum of wealth disappeared and their assets absorbed by the government. 

During the Summer of 2025, entire states[4] were declared “unsustainable” and completely abandoned by the federal government, much like how the Soviets had done in 2011. Citizens were relocated to “temporary settlements” where they were promptly killed and turned into Ration Omega. The US military, or what was left of it, were told that they were executing terrorists. The soldiers involved in the operation were then put on riot duty and were usually killed in the violence. 

This was of course noticed by the remaining population, but the corporate media never covered it. Vague whispers spoke of entire towns disappearing, and to calm the population, President Holden authorized placing sedatives in the water supply. The malnourished population was extremely susceptible to the calming effects of the opioids, to the point that some people starved to death in a drug-induced coma. 

At the request of Former President Jarret, President Holden signed a bill to authorize “population control squads” in the biggest cities left, namely Chicago, Detroit, Cincinnati, Minneapolis, New York, and Philadelphia. Mobs of unemployed were drafted into the police forces, and given just about whatever was on hand - rusted knives, improvised, low caliber pistols, and lead pipes. Federal forces were fed false information claiming that huge amounts of AVA and Pilgrim members were hiding out in these cities and plotting to overthrow the little order there was left, despite both of the groups being effectively extinct. In particular, in New York City, federal forces exterminated an estimated 20,000 people under the guise of “gang violence”. 

While the “gang pacification” operation was undertaken in New York, Vice President Dean Williamson worked with the Provisional Governor of New York to investigate the “internal security leak” of 2022. Most of those involved were long since dead, and while it was clear that the “truth” was never revealed, there was still one person left who might be alive: Courtney Brown. 

Courtney Brown was David Sturge’s former secretary and later concubine. Despite there being no evidence of her learning the secrets of the company, President Holden had decided that she was the last loose end of the Food, Inc Scandal of 2022 and as such was to be found and interrogated. 

The NYPD put out wanted posters for her, which described her as an AVA mastermind or Pilgrim terrorist, depending on who was putting up the posters. For a while, no information came up, and the leads died down. 

Despite the purges, the population of the United States was still steadily growing. The Department of American Continuity had gotten perfect seed samples of all the crucial American crops, such as wheat, barley, potatoes, tomatoes, corn, lettuce, carrots, beans, and even a few fruits. Turkeys had gone extinct, and pigs were deemed too inefficient, but the last generations of scrawny, malnourished cows, sheep and chicken had been covertly ferried to Alaska. There was no biological diversity left in the continental United States, and Operation: Eagle’s Nest began to move on to their next phase: the eventual invasion of Canada. 

Population extermination squads were temporarily retired, and throughout the Winter of 2025, President Holden’s Cabinet and the Department of American Continuity began drafting up plans for the upcoming war with Canada. President Holden became increasingly jingoistic and inflammatory in his rhetoric towards their northern neighbor, and began drafting up huge amounts of unemployed into being cannon fodder for the inevitable siege of Ottawa. Incentives were made such as better food quality (with the Department of American Continuity finishing their operations in the continental United States, food and water shortages began to subside) and less cramped housing conditions. Empty farms throughout the Rust Belt and Great Plains were turned into training camps where the unemployed masses began to be turned into somewhat-lethal disposable killing machines. Criminals were used as target practice, and National Guard armories began to be emptied of the ordnance they had collected in 2005. 

As the United States became increasingly nationalistic and almost fascist in nature, the spark to live again reappeared in many of the downtrodden. They were told that while they might not live to see it, they could help create a better world for their children by taking the vast resources that Canada had been hoarding for themselves. Every hardship of the new millennium, every violent uprising, every food shortage and water shortage could have been alleviated if Canada and the United States were one nation. In January 2026, the Army had swelled to over 10 million active members. By February, it had jumped to 23 million. And by March, almost 30 million people had joined the Army, either of their free will or by draft. 

On February 19th, 2026, President Holden was notified by the Provisional Governor of New York that Courtney Brown had been found. President Holden, who was already in New York City (he had found Washington, DC to be increasingly uncomfortable due to the constant flooding and storms), was escorted by his retinue of Marine bodyguards to the high-rise where Courtney Brown was being detained. 

When he first saw her, he was struck by her beauty. She had an aura of both youthful innocence and the wisdom that came from maturity. It was here that he changed his mind, and gave her a choice: come live with him as his Presidential concubines, or be sent to work to death in a prison factory. 

Courtney, who had long been accustomed to selling her body to survive, agreed to be President Holden’s personal mistress. 

President Holden began to take Courtney with him everywhere, and even let her attend cabinet meetings. Whenever he tried to make advances on her, she would always come up with some excuse. President Holden actually started to enjoy her playing hard to get, and he would relieve his stress by flirting with her. Courtney had an almost uncanny ability to sense when the President was stressed, and she slowly wore him down into letting her become his confidant. 

President Holden knew that she was trying to wind him up or gain information from him, but what could she do? In actuality, AVA and the Pilgrims were extinct, and the only thing keeping the country together was the common enemy of Canada. There was no reason for her to betray him and lose her privileges: already, she was one of the lucky few to have regular meals of proper food, air conditioning, and all the water she could drink. In the off chance she tried to turn on him, he could simply kill her and no one would ever question it. 

On March 1st, 2026, President Holden, Vice President Williamson, and several other high-ranking members of the Department of American Continuity would leave the country for the 2026 Alliance of Nations Summit, hosted by Argentina in Puerto Santa Cruz. The subject of the meeting? “The Matter of Sustainability and Triage of the Human Race”. 

[1] Puerto Rico was declared unsustainable in 2005, along with all of America’s overseas territories. Evacuations were not offered by the government, and after 2006 they were for all intents and purposes left for dead. 
[2] The new flag of Argentina had the same basic pattern of its previous iteration, except the “Sun of May” at the center was replaced with a scythe and pickaxe (the symbol of the Argentine People’s Party), and the blue stripes were now red.
[3] The nations that attended the December 1st, 2020 Alliance of Nations summit included: The USA, the European Federation, East Germany, Poland, the Nordic Union, the UK, Ireland, the USSR, Japan, Australia and New Zealand, Argentina, and India. China, Canada, South Africa, and Mexico were all invited but declined to attend. 
[4] The states abandoned included: California, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina, Tennessee, North Carolina, and Florida. 


Part 4
The Living Death

The Great Solar Storm

In the aftermath of the Antarctica Conference, the remaining nations of the world were sure that they could ride out the total collapse of the ecosystem and the resulting mega-famine. All the nations agreed (or were at least okay with) that the amount of mass death required to stabilize civilization was necessary. Population extermination squads were an increasingly common method of reducing strain on resources, and “anti-terrorism operations” were being conducted in each nation of the Big Four. 

Yes, many would have to die, but to the chosen few that remained, they would have to carry that burden for the rest of their lives. Several heads of state, namely Supreme Minister Savateev and Chancellor Falkenhammer, began to experience delusions of martyrdom. Antarctica was a pipe dream, a fool’s errand, and as long as the various governments around the world had retreated to their bunkers and hoarded all the useful technology, they could wait out the impending collapse and recolonize the world in the mid 21st century. 

The plans were slightly different for each country, but every nation planned on retreating to fortified bunkers by 2038 at the very latest (that being Japan). More or less, the contingency plans all involved the vast majority of the population to be starved out and industry to be stopped for a few decades to give the remaining scientists time to think of a better solution. 

But that did not come to pass. 

On November 3rd, 2026, at 18:53 Central Standard Time, one of the last remaining operational NASA satellites detected an incoming anomaly. A massive solar eruption on the surface of the Sun had occurred, and now the particles were heading straight for Earth. 

The satellite in question had been launched in 1981 as a way to detect large scale nuclear power plants to make sure no nations were violating the United Nations Resolution on Human Safety and Nuclear Power. The satellite had later been used to detect the aftermath of radioactive fallout and gamma particles after the Sinai War, and later, after the Indian-Pakistani nuclear war of 2002. 

What alarmed the one lone researcher, sitting in front of a cracked monitor in a bunker in Alaska, was the fact that the particles reported were not landing in a way concurrent with the way nuclear fallout fell from nuclear bombs. It took him a few seconds to realize that the particles were being blasted on to the Earth, from outside the atmosphere, and in the direction of the sun. The projected peak flux of the solar event was a record X-57. 

He scrambled to report his findings to the Alliance of Nations, to Food, Inc, to anyone who would listen to him, but it was too late: the lights all shattered and sparks danced in the air. 

At first, many were confused by the sight. Some found it beautiful. Streaks of colors waved through the sky, no matter the time. In Sapporo, Japan, construction workers were blinded as crimson ribbons filled the sky. Children danced in the slums of Buenos Aires, celebrating the wondrous lights above them. Elation turned to fear when shards of charred metal landed in cities in hailstorms, and then entire satellites fell out of orbit. A huge, clunky spy satellite from 1967 landed off the coast of Wellington, New Zealand and caused three people to be swept out to sea in the splashdown. Larger and larger objects began to burn up in the atmosphere. A rocket booster landed in Grand Coulee Dam, Washington, and flooded the entire town of Grand Coulee. Abandoned spaceships carpet bombed the dying oceans, filling them with toxic chemicals and rancid fuel. Allegedly, the remnants of the Station for International Cooperation and Friendship broke apart above central China, landing as far west as Chongqing and as far east as Zhangzhou. 

All across the world, the tiny, frail remnants of industry and electronics fried in the storm. It lasted less than 10 minutes. 

Entire power networks went up in flames, causing uncontrollable fires in the towns they were located in. Power lines exploded and landed in irrigation systems, which shocked anyone who touched them. Outages led to countless millions being trapped in buildings all across the world. Children became permanently blinded, and an unusual number of babies were stillborn or born blind for a week afterwards. Communication lines short circuited for the privileged few still able to access them. Cargo planes fell out of the sky, usually landing in remote, isolated places with no hope of rescue. 

The fledgling solar and wind farms in Oceania and Europe fizzled out and never became operational again. Wind collection towers collapsed into the sea and eventually mixed with rocket fuel to create chemical chimeras unseen to mortal man. Nuclear power plants across the world went critical as various electronic components became irreparably damaged. Emergency services scrambled to prevent the reactors from going past the point of no return and exploding. Not all were successful - in Australia, just three reactors exploded out of the almost 2000 units of various sizes. And with them, over 10 million died and Melbourne, Adelaide and Brisbane were wiped off the face of the earth. 

The few remaining pumps and sewer systems in North America and Europe all finally broke down. Septic tanks were eventually filled beyond capacity and burst in the following days, causing numerous health issues and outbreaks of common diseases. The dying skeleton of global trade turned to dust as the last functioning supply lines broke down due to malfunctions. Refrigerators in bunkers around the world broke down, becoming ticking time bombs of disease and rot. 

And the most terrifying aspect was that no one knew the full extent of the damage that the event caused. 99.9% of all advanced electronics became permanently inoperable, and governments struggled to regain control. Military equipment was prioritized first, then communication, then industrial food production and water purification, and then everything else. In the various anarchic regions of the world, mainly in Central America, Africa and India, their scant electronics caused their electrical infrastructure to remain mostly intact, but they suffered different problems. 

In the few electronics that were functioning, electrical fires and system failures cascaded into gargantuan mega-fires that burned entire cities. Almost the entire Congo burned down, from the coast of the Atlantic ocean to the coast of the Indian ocean. The amount of ash and soot that went into the atmosphere blotted out the Sun for an entire month, and the last, most hardiest plant life finally died from the lack of sunlight or from being burnt up in a mega fire. Farms and greenhouses that survived the fires soon dried up as the atmospheric contaminants disrupted the water cycle, causing a mega-drought that lasted for as long as six months in some areas of the world. 
Part 6
Nothing Beside Remains

Night Falls on America

Department of American Continuity Safehouse located outside of Detroit, Michigan. Photographed in 2021

11:43 PM
07/03/27
Three Miles outside of Fort Wayne, Indiana

Dean Williamson hadn’t slept in a day. 

Twenty-four hours ago, he and his retinue of Secret Service bodyguards, along with Major Peter Morris of the Third Division of the Virginia National Guard, were attacked and waylaid by the American Volunteer Army outside of Columbus, Ohio. Having the only diesel powered motor vehicle left in America, using gas plundered from occupied Canada, his convoy was an easy target. Those that recognized the sound of a diesel engine were incited into a fury, and after President Holden mysteriously disappeared, many felt abandoned by the man who had led them to war. Many more felt the same when Boston, Massachusetts, Washington, D.C, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and Charleston, West Virginia were destroyed in a nuclear hellfire. The USSR, China, the Federation, maybe even Brazil… no one knew who launched them, not that it mattered now. Just how no one knew if the USA had launched their retaliatory strikes. The last remnants of the old world were dying out, the last breath of a world executed by solar flare. 

“Mister President, we’ll get you through this. We swore an oath,” Agent Wheeler said. 

Mister President. He had forgotten that he was no longer veep. He was the 48th President of the United States! What was left of it, at least. To think, only a month ago, the entire country was united and under one flag after successfully taking Ottawa. And now, it was tearing itself apart. This would not be his legacy - not as long as he drew breath. He would re-unite the United States, all 58 States, even if it took him the rest of his life. He just needed to make contact with the rest of Operation: Eagle’s Nest in Alaska, and they’d surely send reinforcements. 

The Third US Civil War had started on June 14th, 2027, when President Holden vanished off the face of the earth. He was not seen at the Presidential Tower in New York City, and after a squadron of Marines tore half of Manhattan apart to try to find him (or his remains), Dean Williamson was sworn in as the 48th President of the United States of America. Just a day later, while President Williamson was en route to New York City, he received news that Washington, DC was hit by nuclear weapons. Over the next hour, confirmed hits were reported in Charleston, Pittsburgh, and Boston, before Cheyenne Mountain lost contact with the rest of the United State’s satellites. The Atlantic Fleet reported that the nukes were launched by a submarine, and investigations to determine which country owned the submarine were underway, before communications were severed - most likely, he suspected, by the Pilgrims. 

The Pilgrims. That was a name he had hoped never to hear again. Attorney General Dent, overseeing American justice in the Ottawa Trials, was assassinated outside of Augusta, Maine and his body was allegedly on display in the city hall. The Armed Forces were trying to retake New England, but after communications went out they experienced setbacks. He knew that with his current resources, retaking New England would be a lost cause. 

The rest of the Northeast was quickly dying off, as radiation and acid rain from contaminated cities ravaged those brave boys in green in New York. If President Holden was alive in New York City, he wouldn’t last much longer. A part of him, deep down, was glad that Holden was missing. In those final months he was in office, he was like a different man. Cold and ruthless, he sacrificed untold millions to conquer Canada. Yet, when President Bouchard signed the terms of surrender, President Holden made no efforts to begin Phase Four of Operation: Eagle’s Nest and begin the resettlement of American citizens in the Canadian Arctic. Former President Jarret was to oversee that part of the plan, and come to think of it, he hadn’t seen Jarret in over a month. Well, he never liked him. President Williamson had planned on removing him from the Cabinet when it was all over. 

Shit, he’d have to make a cabinet. Major Morris would make a good Secretary of Defense, and Agent Wheeler’s loyalty would be rewarded by making him the Secretary of Justice. Would he pardon Holden though? He was not the paragon of American Mercantilism as he had made himself out to be. Should he be put on trial? Or would - 

There was a thunderous blast, and the M-125 McCain in front of him imploded into a cloud of black smoke and ungodly heat, despite it being the dead of night. 

“Incoming Charlies!” a marine shouted. 

President Williamson didn’t see anymore, Wheeler had forced him onto the floor of the truck when the blast first hit. He could only listen to the popping of gunshots, the thud of bodies and the clinking of casings. 

After just a few minutes, it was over. Major Morris came to personally check on him. 

“He’s unharmed,” Agent Wheeler said. 

“Fort Wayne is compromised, sir. It’s those communists from AVA,” Morris reported. “Killed three of my men. Good men.”

President Williamson gulped and took a moment to collect himself. “How many did you kill? Did you give them Dent’s regards?” 

“Recon spotted twelve. All wearing Green Bay Grays[1]. One of them had a Lawyer[2], that’s how they took out Pointman.”

“So these were Holden’s boys?” President Williamson asked rhetorically. 

“Father O’Callahan[3] probably twisted their minds from Patriots to this,” Agent Wheeler said. 

“P…Patriots?” a weak voice quivered, choking on blood. 

President Williamson looked down to see a scrawny, sweating man, lying on the scorched pavement. His blood was watering the long-parched dirt around him. 

“The only patriots a-” the man sputtered before his brains decorated the dead grass. 

“I don’t listen to traitors, especially those that kill my boys!” Major Morris said, holstering his sidearm. 

The convoy began to pack up. The two injured soldiers, Private Welsh and Private Brooks, begged for their lives before they were euthanized honorably. President Williamson gave them a salute, before their bodies were tossed on the wrecked M-125. 

As he climbed on the back of the command truck, Major Morris began plotting a course for Monon, Indiana, staying away from the AVA strongholds along the Great Lakes. They had just five hours before the sun would rise again, and they’d need to find somewhere in the shade or else they’d be cooked alive in their vehicles. Ironically, each battle had made the convoy look more rugged, and during the day they looked like yet another battle site in the Third Civil War. 

“We’ll reach the Duluth Bunker by the end of the month,” Major Morris declared. “I’m not risking any more men to those godless fanatics in Chicago.” 

President Williamson only slowly nodded. 

Off in the distance, they could hear the sounds of gunfire, screaming, and an ever-present smell of smoke and charred meat wafted through the air. Occasionally, large, thunderous explosions caused the trucks to rumble, but they were always followed by silence. President Williamson could stand the gunfire and sounds of battle, it was the eerie silence that accompanied it that got to him. Silence was the most common sound out here. Loud, deafening silence that made you hear your own blood pumping in your veins. 

AVA at least still wanted to live, even if their intentions were misguided. The nukes had made many give up hope. The town of St. Clairsville, Ohio, was right on the border of West Virginia and Pennsylvania. The town was completely silent as the convoy spread through, as every body was mummified by the sun and cooled in the dark night. The entire town had chosen to Seek God, all at once. Even the children. 

Loudonville, Ohio, was found burnt to the ground, completely unrecognizable. Hoagland, Indiana was even worse than St. Clairsville. In St. Clairsville, from what he could tell, the suicide was at least voluntary. Hoagland’s seemed to be forced, as freshest bodies were those of the National Guard. McRichard, Maryland was found deserted, with doors still open and even a few fires burning, as if everyone in the town had just vanished. And on every road, there were countless bodies, some of them heaped in piles, some of them hung up to be butchered, and some of them rot where they lay. 

And with every town he passed through, President Williamson felt like he had already failed as President. Sacrifices had to be made for America to survive, this he knew, but these were not deliberate. They were not for the Greater Good of America. They were senseless, meaningless, disgusting. 

Another explosion shook President Williamson from his thoughts. This one was a deep, blood red and sparkled like wildfire. 

“What the hell was that?” he mumbled, shooting Agent Wheeler a blank stare. 

“Fireworks, sir. It’s the Fourth of July.” 

[1] Colloquial term used by career officers to refer to the mass-produced gray fatigues used by the Army during their invasion of Canada, manufactured in Green Bay, Wisconsin. 
[2] Nickname for the US’s main anti-tank weapon, the M-80 LAW, produced in 1980 and never seeing actual wartime use until the US-Canadian War of 2027.
[3] Suspected to be the current leader of the American Volunteer Army, located out of Chicago. The CIA was unable to confirm before the communications blackout. 
Part 7
A Silent Earth

The Journals of Courtney Brown (Working Title)

June 13th, 2027: Going to the Bunker, leaving NYC
June 15th, 2027: Arriving at the bunker in greenland
June 16th, 2027: EMP blackout
June 20th, 2027: Final broadcast from china, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2PrlMQZWpPU 
July 4th, 2027: Mutiny
July 23rd, 2027: Intercepted broadcasts confirm that the USSR has nuked Iceland
August 3rd, 2027: Midwest nuclear disaster, the only nukes that hit their targets are Moscow and Berlin (ironically already destroyed)
October 23rd, 2027: Arrival of new conspirators
November 18th, 2027: Cascadia proclaims independence over radio
February 6th, 2028: Patriot attack 
August 29th, 2028: Bases in Michigan go dark
October 10th, 2028: Radio signals by AVA proclaim victory and announce the formation of the Socialist Republic of the Great Lakes
November 12th, 2028: Cheyenne Mountain Base defects 
March 14th, 2029: Bases in Hawaii go dark
July 4th, 2029: The New England Republic is formed and announced via radiowaves
September 6th, 2029: Intercepted broadcasts confirm the death of the Australian Prime Minister
May 24th, 2030: Polish number stations go dark
June 18th, 2030: Argentine Antarctica declares independence, claiming to be the “true” Argentina
September 7th, 2030: Intercepted transmissions detail Venezuela being abandoned by Argentina
January 20th, 2031: Broadcasts from East Germany cease
February 21st, 2031: Meteor storm causes satellites to come crashing down
July 15th, 2031: Courtney gives birth to Holden’s child (gross)
October 6th, 2031: Australian-New Zealand Civil War spreads to Antarctica
May 10th, 2032: Truce of Concordia
June 15th, 2032: Sweeney’s suicide
September 25th, 2032: Last cow dies of a disease
October 15th, 2032: Broadcasts from Mexico cease
February 20th, 2033: NER holds elections
March 31st, 2033: Heatwaves cause the bunker’s systems to brown out temporarily 
May 24th, 2033: Flooding and erosion force the bottom level to be evacuated 
October 23rd, 2033: Holden’s death
September 4th, 2034: Intercepted broadcasts confirm the death of Savateev and a third USSR civil war
September 13th, 2034: The USSR is dissolved over radio
February 27th, 2035: Contact with Alaska is lost
May 27th, 2035: First reports of death due to the Great Famine
July 11th, 2035: The NER declares war on the Socialist Republic of the Great Lakes for their access to the great lakes
August 1st, 2035: Cascadia falls to civil war
February 6th, 2036: Fall of Santa Roca

Note on diction: As Courtney is not very educated, her first few entries are written with simple sentences and have occasional spelling/grammatical errors. As she educated herself, her entries will become more coherent. 

June 17th, 2027

I was not able to take my old journal with me, not enough time. So much has happened in the past week and I cannot let them find out that I know how to write. I am writing now in the dead of night, after the communications black out. General Sitwell said that the bombs were flying and the Barn couldn’t be found. 

I haven’t slept in three days. It all feels like a dream, like it’s not real, and that tomorrow I’ll wake up in the Penthouse again. 

Richard’s wife couldn’t make it. Supposedly, she was killed by a vagrant when the Secret Service turned their back. Bullshit. He wants me, and only me. Darlene and Charles cried all the way to the plane. Despite it being the dead of night, the city was crawling with revolutionaries. Madison Square was filled with burning corpses. Cops and NGs[1] were shooting at each other. That church on broadway was filled with crying, and then silence. I saw some horrible writing on the ground, sprawled out and written with blood: “Ration Omega IS DELICIOUS”. I covered Darlene’s eyes, poor girl, though she was still tearing up and asking for her mommy. 

A group of men wearing grey bandanas and waving Canadian flags almost cornered us in an alley and tried to kill Richard. Agent Jaurez was killed. I hope his family made it to Alaska. Some bastard grabbed me and I thought I was going to die right then and there. I’d be fine with dying. Then he started oozing blood from his nose and fell over. Some agent, I never got his name, had shoved a combat knife through his neck and took him down before being pulled under. 

An armored steamer pulled up to us as we were nearing Times Square, and a squad of Green Berets jumped out. Said they were covering our retreat. We never saw them again. 

I don’t remember how we got to the air field. Richard looked like he was trying to find the right words, but was silent the entire time. The only thing he said that day was a simple “Thank you”, to the pilot. 

The plane sitting in the airfield wasn’t Air Force One, or some military bomber plane, but just a rusted cargo plane. Words in some European language was written on it. Richard, Darlene and Charles were shoved in, and then I was pushed in. A few agents buckled us in and then took defensive positions in the cargo bay. General Sitwell appeared from the cockpit and when he saw the President was in the plane, he rushed back and yelled at the pilot to take off, and that rebels were closing in. 

I’ve never flown before and I hope to never fly again. My ears still hurt. Darlene didn’t stop crying. Charlie had stopped his screaming and simply staring at the floor. The agents were wiping blood of their uniforms and drenching them in alcohol. 

It was the longest 19 hours of my life. Every single second, I thought that we’d be shot out of the sky. Or run out of fuel. Or just crash. 

When we landed, it was dark again. Off in the distance, I could see some muddy, white hills - ice, I think. A group of heavily armed men ran up to us, clad head to toe in patterened camo, gas masks and other military equipment. They saluted President Richard and after confirming who we were, rushed boxes off the plane and led us towards a dry, dirty path. At the end of the path, in a center of a field of weathered tree stumps, was a rusted barn. 

General Sitwell yelled something in his weird military slang and the rusted barn door swung open, revealing a darkness that seemed to go on forever. I felt a rush of warm air and looked behind us to see the rusted plane burning before something exploded and the metal frame fell inwards. The soldiers shoved us in and then shut the door when they were all inside. 

Richard swallowed hard and glanced at us. “Get them under. We’ll talk later.” 

One of the soldiers, his mask started glowing green and it was all I could see as he grabbed my hand and walked with me in the darkness. The barn didn’t smell bad, just like… dust. A squeak of metal later and we were in a cold metal place, an elevator. Darlene squeezed my hand so hard I thought it would fall off, and Charles was breathing so loudly. The elevator started descending, oddly silent, like it was brand new. 

After probably a minute, harsh, blinding lights began to sneak in through the doors before they finally opened, revealing a pristine concrete hallway. Dozens of doorways led to other rooms, one of them being a library, where I am writing this right now. 

The kids were led to a comfortably furnished room, with silk sheets, stuffed matresses, and sinks that despensed purified water. A plastic pink dollhouse, probably from the Good Times, was there for Darlene. Charles’s bed had a faded cowboy costume on it, complete with a pretend rifle. 

The soldiers offered to bring me a chair, but I just sat on Darlene’s bed with her. She kept asking me where her mommy was until she finally fell asleep. Charles tried to leave several times but a soldier stationed outside always stopped him. They were still wearing gasmasks, and later that day, Richard finally looked in on us. He said nothing, just a curt nod, and continued walking with General Sitwell. We weren’t allowed to leave except to use the restroom, and that was only if we had someone with us. 

At some point, food was brought to us. Hot, warm tomato soup with noodles was our dinner, or breakfast, or lunch. Darlene only ate the noodles. She was kind enough to let me drink her broth, but she’s still so skinny. Richard didn’t join us, though Sitwell told us that he wished us well. 

After our meal, Charles demanded something to entertain him. The soldier guarding us didn’t let him leave, but asked a nearby guard to get something for “the kid”. 

Richard finally showed up a little while after, and I saw him smile for the first time in months when he saw Darlene and Charles. “I got something just for you, sport,” he said to Charles, and took out a book. “Picked it just for you,” he handed it to him. It was yellowed and old, but in good condition. It was called Robinson Curuso: some adventure about a man surviving in the wilderness. Richard said that they were all Robinson Curusos now. 

He then pulled me aside, where he thanked me for watching over the children. How I’d become a proper member of their family, of his family, and soon it’d be made official. That shocked me. I didn’t even hear the reason why he gave me three gasmasks, it just went in one ear and out the other. 

He led me to his bedroom, a lavish, ornate room, and he made me relieve his stress. 

Suddenly, there was a loud humming noise and then the lights went off. I could hear Darlene scream out, until a soldier gently told her it was all okay. There was a knock at the door. Sitwell was talking through the doorway about the “Dead Man’s Hand” or something. I convinced Richard to let myself get dressed so that I could check on the kids. By the time I had gotten dressed, the lights slowly flickered back on, this time noticably dimmer. 

Darlene and Charles were fine, and Darlene had calmed down. I stayed with them for as long as I could, and finally, they fell back to sleep. 

And here we are, with me hiding out in the library. I found a clock in there, some old, wind up thing, and it might be almost 4 am. I write slow. The pencils here are for Richard and his advisors, I think, along with the bound notepad that I am writing this on. I will hide it in an airduct nearby. 

CB

June 20th, 2027

A lot happened today. I learned that the reason why the power went out was some kind of scary bomb attack by the Russians. Moscow’s last line of defense. The bombs blew up in the sky and messed with the power like the solar storm last year. Sitwell says that the communication lines to the Nest, the Coop, the Roost and the Yard[2] had been restored. Holden seems far less concerned about his wife’s disappearence than the kids are worried about their mother. Darlene asked if I could be her mother now. How could I refuse that? 

Holden later explained that the reason why he had given me those gasmasks were because of some kind of sickness the Chinese had made. Something very bad, and painful, and spread through the air. He called me stupid for not listening to him, and I lied by saying that I was so distrcted by the thought of being in his family. 

Not that I really have a choice. 

I’ve taken some time to explore more the bunker. Meals are regually hosted in the canteen at 7 AM and 7 PM. Being in the President’s family, we get an extra, smaller meal at noon, though Richard barely eats anything anymore. He spends all his time in the communications room, having whispered conversations on rickety, ancient telephones. 

Charles now walks around, holding his toy gun, with Corporal Weatherly, the guard that stayed with us that first day. Richard once jokingly saluted him, calling him a fine defender of America. Darlene is already bored of her dollhouse, and I found her instead reading some old girly magazine from 1979. The people look so happy in it. 

Suddenly, soldiers and plain-suited men were running through the hallway. One of them dropped a bundle of papers only to hurredly pick them up. 

“We under attack?” Corporal Weatherly asked the nearby soldiers. 

“Transmission out of China,” was all the man said before rushing along with the others. “Probably the last one. It’s just on repeat.” 

The communications room was packed with people, all rushing to open books, pouring over maps, or writing hurredly in books. Richard was in the room, intently listening to a headset as operators were tweaking knobs and dials. A thin looking man was hooking up a casette player and the spools were turning. Richard unplugged the headset and a calm, but defeated, voice was talking. According to one of the suited men, it was in Mandarin. I listened with them, watching them transcribe and translate it, debating over the meaning. It was only a few minutes long, and then followed by some recording of a vintage song. I’ll attach a copy of the transcript below. 

CIA REPORT 2027062043405-1-T-OMEGA
Broadcasted at 04:38, Beijing Time, 21 June 2027
Translated at 97% accuracy by Agent Sun on 20 June 2027, 21:13 Greenland Time

TRANSCRIPT BEGINS

Three notes sound.

Chairman Liang Guowei:

My comrades. Today sets the Red Sun over the glorious People’s Republic of China. It is through our steel will and noble sacrifices that our nation has endured and our people’s voice heard. We lifted our people from the madness of Mao Zedong and forged an economic alliance that changed the very world. We have brought stability to our neighbors and security to our people. 

But just as every day must end, so too must every nation. Today is our end. It is not the end that any of us did want. It is not the end we deserve. Against our best efforts by our bravest revolutionaries, glorious workers and selfless farmers, China has lost the battle for her national spirit. 

On 13 June, at 03:12 Beijing Time, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, made an unprovoked and aggressive attack against our people, our humanity, our dignity. Shanghai, Pyongyang, Seoul, Beijing and Hanoi have all been destroyed in an unprecedented and inhumane act of war and irrational aggression. The Glorious People’s Liberation Army, with righteous fury, did retaliate to defend China’s name. 

Chairman Liang Guowei takes a deep breath, and coughs. He is thinking of what to say. 

With this attack on our sovereignty, untold lives have been lost, and many more will follow. In the destruction of Beijing, our final mercy was released before its completion. It truly was meant to be a final mercy. Our world has seen incomprehensible suffering in the past forty years. Mercy and peace, without pain and indignity, was to be the People’s last gift. 

Chairman Liang Guowei begins to wheeze slightly. 

China’s long, eternal rest is approaching. It will be a peaceful rest. Quick, and painless. Soon our people will no longer have to bear the horror of living in this world. Women will no longer have to fear losing their child to a pointless war in a far-away land. Our eldest will no longer be working for the good of the People, but will rest at last. Our soldiers need never fire their weapons again and kill our fellow man. Hunger will no longer be met with sacrifice and silence. 

We will all know peace. It is not the peace we wanted. It is not the peace we hoped for. But it is still peace. Let us retain our dignity. Let us remember China as it was meant to be: a powerful, peaceful nation of plenty and equality, championed by strong-willed people who guide the world in a new age of prosperity for all. 

As you succumb to the last Mercy, spend it with those you love. Your comrades in arms. Your mentor in the fields. Your lovers and family. And let us hope that there will be ones to remember us. Let history tell the great tale of the People’s Republic of China! 

All hail the immaculate People’s Republic of China!

Chairman Liang Guowei takes a long sigh and a gunshot is heard. 

Immediately afterwards, a grainy, faint song begins playing. 

TRANSCRIPT ENDS

Agent Sun, the thin suited man, finished translating and read it aloud to Richard. Richard, sitting with his legs crossed, briefly pondered the meaning. 

“The plan continues. This changes nothing,” was all he said. He then noticed me, and rushed me out. 

CB

June 21st, 2027

Agent Sun was found dead today. He had killed himself. He was the only one who was fluent in Mandarin, and the only one to hear what the broadcast was actually saying. 

We are having a funeral for him tomorrow and cremating him. 

CB

June 22nd, 2027

The funeral was weird. Not many people showed up. Richard didn’t show up, he spends all his time in the communications room. 

It wasn’t like my grandma’s funeral. General Sitwell gave a speech about Sun’s service to America. A few other agents saluted, and then two of the soldiers carried his body and threw it into the furnace. General Sitwell played a few notes on a rusted bugle and then marched out of the room. 

CB

June 29th, 2027

Richard caught me in the library today. He was surprised, saying that he didn’t know I was so refined. I lied and told him I can barely read, and was only getting picture books to read to Darlene. 

He smiled, and told me he would show me his appreciation later that night. 

CB

July 4th, 2027

I woke up today to shouting and then a gunshot. There was a knock and then our door was busted down. 

“Clear!” a muffled voice said. It sounded like it was Corporal Weatherly. “The President is unharmed.” 

“What is the meaning of this?” Richard growled. 

“Some of the New Jersey boys got drunk and started to rant about seeing their families,” the corporal said, moving his flash light around the room. 

“And?” 

“A few of them tried to get out. Said they were going to go to Alaska or die trying. So the General made good on their word.” 

Richard buried his face in his hands. “How many did we lose?” 

“Just one. After Private Fox took some lead to the head the others fell in line.” 

I spent the rest of the day trying to find out more information about what happened. I overheard two guys talking about how Alaska is “off limits”, and that our base, the Barn, is a secret. The “others” weren’t told about it. Only three other people know about it. 

CB

July 5th, 2027

Apparently, the soldiers who tried to leave were all killed anyway. Richard called everyone into the main hallway and told us that he wouldn’t tolerate any “disruptions” to “the plan”. That he, and many others, had sacrified too much to throw this away. 

Turns out that’s not all what happened yesterday. Former President Jarret was confirmed dead by a team in Alaska - he had been found dead in his US Marine escort boat, and strung up something awful with his own body parts. 

Charles didn’t take it well, calling them “ungrateful traitors”. 

I am moving this journal to the room with the furnace in it. If I need to, I can burn it. 

CB

July 23rd, 2027

I’ve gotten very good at sneaking around the base. At night, after spending time with Richard, I always excuse myself to take a shower, then I go to the library to get a book to read. I don’t hide my ability to read from him anymore, but I always pick out smaller, easier books. He still doesn’t know I can write. 

But on the way back to his room, I always check the communications room for any new transcripts or information on the outside world. There’s an old, simple map on the wall, with labels for countries and tiny, yellow pins in certain places, like Moscow. I think it means they are destroyed by bombs. 

The map had been changed, slightly: a small island between that big island where we are and those two smaller islands near Europe had been crossed out. Iceland, it was labeled. Yellow pins were all over the island, and next to it was a half-translated document. The letters looked weird, like some were backwards, and it was about a Soviet commander announcing that he was wiping out the last of the “European cancer”. 

I looked at the map some more. Huge sections of the world, like the abandonded states, were completely blacked out. Europe was filled with red and black pins and China was completely crossed out. Some islands in the northern sea were circled and had various notes written next to them. I then saw something that broke my heart - New York City was crossed out. A black pin was neatly placed in it. 

“We won!” a voice came from behind me. I almost jumped out of my skin. 

I turned around to see Charles, wearing his silk night clothes. 

“What are you doing up?” I asked. 

“I heard you talking to yourself. I wanted to make sure you weren’t a traitor like those other soldiers!” he declared. 

“I’m not! I promise!” I assured him, kneeling down to give him a hug. I then looked him in the eye. He had sneaky eyes. “What did we win?” 

“Our company won, of course. Those slimy bastards from FulTec are all gone.”

“Watch your mouth! There is no need for an eleven year old to talk that way!” I scolded him. 

“That’s what Dad calls them. I didn’t know that was a bad word,” he apologized. 

“Well, don’t call them that around me!” I said, and gave him another hug. 

I led him back to his room, and when he was asleep, I secretly went down to the furnace room and wrote this. 

CB

August 3rd, 2027

The soldiers were on high alert today. The soldiers were actually holding their guns. They haven’t done that for almost a month. Some of them were even patrolling the hallway. Instead of encouraging it, Richard told Charles to “shut up” and told me and Corporal Weatherly to keep the kids in their room. 

Charles was in a sour mood for the rest of the day. Darlene was her usual happy self. She’s started writing poems, Richard shows me them every night. But today she gave me one just for me. I didn’t quite understand what she was writing about, but it sounded as pretty as a six year old could write. 

Dinner was brought to us today. Beef stew and wheat crackers again. Corporal Weatherly thinks that one of the cows died, and the cook is trying to make the most of it. Soon the bones will be ground up into our wheat flour, he joked. 

At about 10 at night, General Sitwell announced through the speakers that everything was all clear, and the soldiers relaxed. They didn’t let me leave the room with the kids - not even to go to the bathroom. I think that Charles told Richard that I was in the communications room. Richard himself came to get me, and apologized for the precautions. 

Something “had happened” in the Midwest and Sitwell was worried that the location of the base could be compromised. Richard was so tired that he simply retired to bed, and didn’t even use me. 

That was an hour ago. I snuck into the communications room for the first time in a week. Much of the USA was crossed out, with little blue pins in various locations - the bases. In between the west coast and the lakes were a ton of yellow pins and black pins. Scrawled notes in both Richard and Sitwell’s handwriting described how the “Portland Collective” and the “Lamb” had engaged in a battle for access to bombs in Montana and North Dakota. Big bombs - the ones that destroyed those cities earlier this summer. 

The Lamb’s army had launched a few of them, with Sitwell noting that Berlin and Moscow were hit, despite already being destroyed earlier this year (Sitwell had even wrote “MORON” in the sidelines). Some of them didn’t hit their targets though - a technician had wrote that he believed it was a compiuter malfunction, and now… there’s a huge radioactive wasteland there. 

Richard wrote saying that the Lamb was “out of the game” while Sitwell was worried he could make it here if he leaves his base in the Lakes. When Sitwell had confirmed that all the bombs were accounted for and had counted up the destroyed cities (there were a few extra ones in Canada and even one in Mexico), he had announced the all clear and to stand down. 

I could try to find more information about the “Lamb”, though I don’t want to risk my position. Besides, tomorrow is Darlene’s birthday and she want to have a tea party with me and Richard. I have to get ready for that. 

CB

August 4th, 2027

Richard didn’t show up for Darlene’s tea party today. Said he was too busy. Instead, he showed up to her room after dinner and gave her a wrapped package. She opened it up and her eyes widened. All was forgiven, it seemed. Inside was a tiny, smudged block of chocolate wrapped in foil. 

CB

September 1st, 2027

I worked up the courage to start reading Robinson Curoso. The words are pretty complex. It seems ancient, almost like another language. I had to check a dictionary for a lot of them. 

CB

September 20th, 2027

Been reading more RC. We are NOT like him, he’s not living in a secret bunker with all this food! He had to do everything, alone, in a forest! 

CB

October 15th, 2027

I’ve been getting restless. I’ve been begging Richard to show me more of the Barn. I’ve explored every nook and cranny, every corner and closet and I’m bored. I want to see the other levels. I know there’s a hangar, and a storage level, and also where they’re growing next year’s food. 

He finally relented today and took me in the elevator, then we went up a few floors. 

It smelled horrible. Like the streets of New York. I could instantly tell that this was where they kept the animals. I’d never seen anything before, except a cat once when I was a girl, and the hairless birds that would be in the streets back before the heat waves. 

This floor was a lot more open than the living quarters, and seemed like a large underground warehouse. It was filled with hundreds of tiny, metal boxes and tubes and pipes. Drains divided the floor. Workers wearing plastic suits and gas masks sprayed water using hoses, while others were organizing chemicals in syringes or writing things down on slates. 

“Mister President! Sir! We aren’t due for another inspection until next month!” a man said, wearing a gray jumpsuit and a hard hat. He came rushing up to me and Richard. “If I’d have some advance notice I’d have cleaned it up! Get rid of the smell!” He then looked at me, and his wrinkled face seemed confused. “Who is she?”

“The new first lady, actually. The next Mrs. Holden,” Richard said. 

I don’t remember how I responded. We had some awkward conversation and then I was led to one of the metal boxes. 

“This room contains half of the livestock left in North America,” the worker, Mr. Stevenson said. “Currently, we have 328 chickens, 11 turkeys, and 47 cows. Our sister site in Alaska has almost 1000 chickens, plus several hundred sheep, and at least a hundred cows. I’m not sure how many are still alive. They still think turkeys are extinct!” 

“What are turkeys?” I asked. 

Mr. Stevenson laughed, but Richard stared him down. 

“I’ll show you, I guess,” he muttered and led us down the hallway to a row of smaller boxes. He opened one of them and revealed a rusted cage made of rough steel. Inside, on a bed of dried grass, was a tiny, scrawny looking bird. Its eyes were red and bloodshot, and the feathers still on its body were gray and frayed. It had some weird, veiny sac on its throat, it looked quite indecent actually. 

“He’s not the most handsome fellow, but what if I told you that he’s actually our healthiest animal? We’ve been breeding them all summer but they’ve all been stillborn or blind,” he continued. 

That was all I could stand, so I excused myself. Richard quickly caught up to, and quietly escorted me back to the living quarters. 

“Does that satisfy your curiosity?” He asked. 

All I could do was nod. 

CB

October 23rd, 2027

Today, new people actually arrived. A couple dozen marines, all thin as bones and their equipment barely hanging on to their uniforms, and three other people. I’ve seen all of them in both Washington and New York. Governor Sanford, his wife, and President Sweeney. Sanford was covered in soot and his face had large scar on his bald, sunburnt head. Patricia Sanford was looking a bit tidier, though one of her arms was in a sling. President Sweeney was wearing a ragged, torn suit and had a blank stare of confusion. 

“Holy mackerel, Fred, what the hell happened?” General Sitwell smiled. 

“AVA attacked. Those damn rebels. They’re always there. They’re ALWAYS up to something,” Sweeney muttered, and then sighed. 

“The communists in the Midwest have taken everything between Lake Erie and the Western Exclusion Zone,” Sanford said. “Like we agreed, we preemptively evacuated once the rebels crossed into the Upper Peninsula. 

[1] Shorthand for National Guardsman
[2] The bases for Operation: Eagle’s Nest were all given code names with a farming theme, as their founders believed that they were symbolically farming and raising a New America like livestock
The Barn: A listening post on the north-western coast of Greenland, built in 1991 before the dissolution of NATO
The Nest: An entire underground city below Fairbanks, Alaska
The Coop: A series of compact but comfortable interconnected bunkers in Hawai’i
The Roost: Code name for the Cheyenne Mountain Complex in Colorado
The Yard: Originally built as a forward operating base for the invasion of Canada, refurbished into a seed vault. Located in Gwinn, Michigan. 

Document: The Shanghai Accords

The Shanghai Accords: A Treaty of Peace, Prosperity, and Mutual Respect between the United States of America, the People's Republic of China and the World
Authored jointly by President Richard M. Nixon and Chairman Chen Qiang
February 28, 1972 – Shanghai, China

Preamble
In recognition of the changing tides of history and the need for stability in an increasingly interconnected world, the United States of America and the People's Republic of China commit to a new era of peaceful coexistence, economic cooperation, and mutual prosperity.
This treaty is signed in the wake of historic transformation within the People's Republic of China, following the succession of Chairman Chen Qiang after the internal reorganization of the Chinese Communist Party in 1971. With the ideological turbulence of the past receding, both nations now look forward to a future built on trade, pragmatism, and respect.

Article I – Principles of Sovereignty and Non-Aggression
Both parties affirm the principle of mutual non-interference. The United States shall not pursue hegemony in the American Continents. The People’s Republic of China shall not pursue hegemony in the Pacific or Asia. 
Each nation recognizes the legitimacy and sovereignty of the other, and shall refrain from actions or rhetoric undermining internal stability.
Both governments agree to curtail hostile ideological campaigns against one another.

Article II – Diplomatic Normalization
The United States, and the rest of the United Nations, formally acknowledges the People's Republic of China as the sole legal government of China.
Liaison offices shall be established in Washington, D.C., and Beijing, with the goal of full diplomatic relations by 1973.
The status of Taiwan (Formosa) shall be resolved peacefully. The United States, and all future signatories, agree to reduce official engagements with the Taipei regime.
The People's Republic of China shall assume its seat at the United Nations Security Council, replacing the Taipei delegation.

Article III – Economic Cooperation and Trade of Essential Goods
Both nations commit to the free and affordable exchange of goods, with a focus on mass-produced consumer products, agricultural commodities, and industrial equipment.
The United Nations shall facilitate the import of Chinese goods, ensuring they remain accessible to the average consumer.
China shall import advanced agricultural, mechanical, and medical technologies from the United States to support its modernization efforts.
Both parties agree to remove tariffs entirely on either party's products. 
Joint trade councils will be established to regulate the flow of goods and ensure fair pricing.

Article IV – Cultural and Scientific Exchange
Programs will be launched to encourage exchange between scientists, engineers, students, artists, and cultural envoys.
Each nation shall open a cultural center in the capital city of the other to foster people-to-people understanding.
Academic and media professionals shall be granted access under mutual visa programs with minimal restrictions.

Article V – Military Restraint and Stability
Both parties shall avoid deploying military forces in provocative proximity to each other’s territories or spheres of influence.
China agrees to reduce its support of revolutionary movements abroad, in exchange for assurances of non-intervention by the United States in East Asian affairs.
Likewise, the United States agrees to reduce their intervention in the Americas.

Article VI – Long-Term Peace and Oversight
A permanent Sino-American Peace and Trade Commission shall be formed to oversee the implementation of this treaty.
The Commission shall convene biannually, alternating between locations in the U.S. and China.
This treaty shall remain in effect for a minimum of twenty years, with provisions for renewal or renegotiation thereafter.

Signatories
Signed this 28th day of February, 1972, in the city of Shanghai, symbolizing a new vision of global peace and mutual benefit.


Richard M. Nixon
President of the United States of America
 陈 强
Chen Qiang
Chairman of the People's Republic of China

Annex: Joint Statement
In forging this treaty, both nations have chosen the path of economic harmony over ideological confrontation. Let this be the beginning of a durable peace, grounded not in suspicion, but in shared opportunity — where American consumers and Chinese workers both find prosperity, and where nations with differences may still walk the road of peace, hand in hand.


THE EUROPA TIMES
Bringing you the most comprehensive and up-to-date reporting in the federation.
Special weekly edition.

22/03/1999
€5.00

SUPREME COURT RULES ON ITALY V. EUROPEAN FEDERATION, STRIKES DOWN ITALIAN DEPORTATION LAW

BRUSSELS, BELGIUM, EURO. FEDERATION - The Federal Supreme Court decided in a ruling today that the provisions of the government of Italy’s Illegal Migration and Italian Security Act are a violation of federal law and must be revoked immediately lest the Italian premier be removed and new elections held. The ruling comes following a lengthy court battle between the Italian state government and the federal government of Europe, which claimed the new act (named above) were an overextension of state policy and breached the European Convention of Human Rights as well as federal Migration and Border Policy. The Italian government tried to argue that the provisions were technically within state power, but their argument was widely considered as weak and ineffectual, and was struck down today.

Italy’s Illegal Migration and Italian Security Act was signed on the 12th November 1998 by the premier of the Italian state government, who was narrowly elected in the 1998 local elections as part of a “black wave” for the far-right National European Front. The government has since taken a hardline approach on legal and illegal immigration to Italy, such as by deploying the local navy to turn around migrant boats and encouraging people to not shop at immigrant-owned stores. New provisions in the IMISA Act included launching a mass deportation program for refugees and encouraging the navy to sink migrant boats if they refused orders to turn around. The Italian government justified the act by claiming the immigrants are “stealing the jobs of ordinary, hardworking Italians” and said they will “spread radiation poisoning across the country”, a claim that has been criticised by experts. The act quickly proved controversial, as mass rioting from immigrants and leftist groups took over the cities of Italy for days before brutal suppression by the police, and far-right violence showed a rapid increase, leading to several deadly clashes between the different groups. The act received widespread condemnation by human rights groups and the federal government, who immediately challenged it and launched a court case against it.

The state government has yet to comment on the ruling, but officials have expressed their severe displeasure on it, as a spokesman commented, “the federal government is continuing to do all they can to stamp out local freedom and democracy”. The NEF has spoken on the issue, promising to “fight on to restore the pride of... (continued on page 3)

37 dead in street fight in Munich

MUNICH, GERMANY, EURO. FEDERATION - A brutal street fight in Munich last night between far-left and right groups led to a total of 37 dead, the final count shows. The violence occurred last night as a group of hooded youth wearing BHD (Bündnis für Heimat Deutschland) uniforms encountered a group of drunken left-wing protestors flying banners for the European Communist and Left party, some even flying the hammer and sickle. Witnesses report a brawl escalating into a fight as the groups withdrew knives and guns and engaged in brutal fighting on a residential street. The fight escalated further as more members of the groups flooded in, presumably due to hearing rumours and the sounds of violence, and as nearby residents tried in vain to stop them. Luckily, police were on duty around the area and a squadron quickly pulled up to end the fight and arrest those responsible.

This fight follows a rapidly increasing trend of political violence, deaths of which have increased by 70% the past year. This also comes before the Federation’s second-ever federal election next month, whose campaign has been marked by increasing violence and record membership of paramilitaries and extremist groups, which remain under heavy watch by the government. Some fear this will depress turnout as voters may decide to stay at home instead of risking injury or death at the hands of rioters and extremists. The Mayor of Munich has commented on the issue, saying that “political violence has no place in our culture” and that “we must all unite, despite our differences, for a greater Munich and a greater Europe”. So far, it looks no one has heeded that message.

The German ECL branch has asserted that its members were at no fault for the incident, claiming that the “terrorists” of the BHD “provoked its members” and “tried to massacre them”. The BHD vehemently denied this, claiming that the “traitorous communists” had “no good reason to be standing around in this area...” (continued on page 10)

Severe drought in Andalusia continues for third year in a row

SEVILLE, SPAIN, EURO. FEDERATION - The city of Seville and the surrounding region of Andalusia has been suffering under a perpetual, record-breaking drought for the past three years ever since the “Black Summers” of 1997 and 98. The average precipitation amount has decreased by 40% since 1990’s “Hot Summer” and water supplies have ran dangerously low, causing agricultural yields to sharply drop and people to move out en masse. Cities such as Seville and Malága have been placed under strict water rationing, and these conditions show no sign of subsiding anytime soon.

The drought is unanimously believed to be caused by accelerating climate change, with the Federation’s Environmental Agency and UK’s Met Office announcing the world passed 2°C of warming since pre-industrial levels for the second time last year, and with the world only getting hotter. This has wreaked havoc on European and global agriculture, with large tracts of soil becoming unusable and workers dying out in the extreme heat. Areas such as Andalusia have adapted to these conditions by solely harvesting crops at night, which has reduced the mortality rate for farmers but has led to health problems among the workers. The lack of water has also made farming far more difficult, and many of the poorest have already left for cooler climates further north. Many scientists have voiced concerns of the issue of desertification, fearing that if temperatures continue their rapid rise, Andalusia and all of Southern Spain may turn to desert and become completely uninhabitable. It is rumoured that contingency measures are prepared for if a crisis point occurs, though not officially announced.

Next week, a member of the Federal Parliament and two members of Spain’s State Parliament will be heading to Seville to discuss these issues with members of the community and local government. The increasing presence of the Frente de Acción Obrera (FAO) in Spain’s south, however, has raised security concerns... (continued on page 12)

FulTec announces new factories to be built near Strasbourg - thousands of new jobs to be created

STRASBOURG, FRANCE, EURO. FEDERATION - In a press conference yesterday, foodstuffs megacorporation FulTec announced the planned creation of five “manufacturing plants” near the city of Strasbourg, following the construction of multiple farms earlier this year. The corporation claimed they would create thousands of new jobs and provide many new employment opportunities for the people of Strasbourg and surrounding villages. Local leaders have reacted positively to this action, the mayor of Strasbourg calling it a “lifeline for many of the city’s struggling and unemployed”.

FulTec has been undergoing rapid expansion in recent years, doubling its workforce since 1996 and rising above its competitors in the foodstuffs industry to become the dominant force in Europe. The company won a massive success last week with the federal Parliament’s decision to repeal the Anti-Monopoly and Support for Small Businesses Act created in 1995, which imposes harsh penalties on companies that form monopolies and can force them to downsize or be broken up. The repeal has been protested by the ECL, trade unions and part of the PES, who claim the government is “selling out” to big corporations such as FulTec. The majority of representatives, however, are in favour, claiming the law “reduces efficiency” and will only worsen the food crisis. Next week, many major trade unions are planning strikes in protest of the repeal and of the supposedly poor working conditions in the farms and factories. Strasbourg is expected to be a hotspot for this with the new developments, with the city’s PES mayor condemning them. FulTec has denied the allegations of poor working conditions, saying that “The health and safety of our workers is our highest priority...” (continued on page 15)

Exclusive: Inside New York City’s “criminal underground”

NEW YORK CITY, NEW YORK, UNITED STATES - In this week’s exclusive article in our special edition, our reporters in New York City journey into the city’s burgeoning criminal underworld. Like other cities in Europe and America, the economic depression, food crisis and rapid urbanisation has led to a giant crime wave in the 1990s, with NYC recording the number of homicides increasing by 125% from 1988 to 1998, with likely many more unrecorded. The lack of gun control compared to Europe has led to American cities having much higher homicide rates and overall violence than most European ones. We head down into the alleys and subways of NYC, meeting with members of the mafia and taking a look at the complicated food supplying and bartering system down there. (article on page 20)

Anti-Federation protests in Greece reach record sizes

ATHENS, GREECE - Anti-European Federation protests in Greece have reached record sizes today, with large protests occurring simultaneously in cities such as Athens, Thessaloniki and Patras. The protests are occurring against the increasing control of the European Federation, which has taken control of part of Greece’s military and supply lots of their food and water. Greece has undergone record droughts over the past few years and has been forced to implement water rationing across many cities. The European Federation has agreed to send fresh water and FulTec has expanded operations in Greece, in exchange for greater control over economic policy. However, these moves have garnered large opposition, with people accusing Europe of rigging elections and fearing annexation. The European federal government has dismissed these accusations, saying... (continued on page 31)

Soviet tanks build up near Berlin - how easily could it hold?

WEST BERLIN, GERMANY, EURO. FEDERATION - Reports from the border and satellite images have been showing a buildup of Soviet and East German forces near the border of the Federation-controlled enclave of West Berlin. With relations becoming increasingly strained between the Federation and the other western powers since the crisis last year, analysts have seen the increasingly isolated West Berlin as a weak point, some claiming that the USSR could take it in just an hour. West Berlin is supplied purely by guarded roads and rail lines, so if war occurred, it is feared supply lines would crumble... (continued on page 34)

The possibility and consequences of a “Green Siberia”

Siberia, alongside the Arctic, is currently the fastest warming region of the world, with much of its ice and permafrost beginning to thaw. The Soviet Union sees this as a boon, as projections show that vast amounts of land could become farmable, possibly creating a solution to the USSR’s food crisis and an antidote to the chaos caused in 1990’s “Hot Summer”. However, many scientists are at odds with this, and fear a “Green Siberia” could bring far more chaos than order to the Soviet Union and the world, with new viruses, methane emissions and much more. In this article, we discuss... (continued on page 46)

Opinion: Nuclear power is not the way forward - cheaper solar and wind are necessary for beating climate change

Written by Dominique Voynet
As of my writing this, the European Federation has built five nuclear power plants since 1990. Seven more are under construction and many more are in the planning stages. The Federation claims they are “necessary” to reduce our carbon emissions and combat climate change, as well as providing “stable and consistent” energy for us to reduce prices. However, when I look at the spiralling costs for plants and the construction times of many years, I start to wonder whether their pursuit of nuclear power is for a different reason, or even effective at reducing our emissions. If we are to “fight climate change” and save our planet, there are many other ways that we can save time, money and not risk another Three Mile Island Incident and repeat 1979. Our continent is perfect for emerging wind (just look at the UK!) and solar, where we have vast and growing amounts of land we can use for building panels... (continued on page 62)

Other major stories:
UK warns Federation to not move Navy inside their EEZ - following the 1997 Channel Crisis, the UK has taken a hard line on European naval exercises in the area. The British Prime Minister today promised “consequences” if Europe was to continue “violating their sovereignty”... (continued on page 37)
The possible motives for China’s expansion across Asia - throughout the decade, China’s rapid expansion throughout the continent and reported war crimes have led to mass condemnation by human rights organisations. The reasons behind their expansion have often been debated, but there is one factor tying them together - ... (continued on page 38)
Hundreds dead after Klan riot in Birmingham, Alabama - a riot by the KKK in Alabama’s state capital has left hundreds dead on both sides as African Americans resist to defend their neighbourhoods. The KKK has seen a resurgence as the decline of agriculture in the American south has left... (continued on page 42)
Study shows world’s last oil reserves to run out by 2003 - a projection from the International Energy Agency predicts the world to run out of oil by 2003, with synthetics not being enough to replace them. This has caused alarm among many of the remaining oil-dependent countries... (continued on page 47)
Dramatic declines in Arctic sea ice could lead to “calamity”, warns prominent climate scientist - a major climate scientist has claimed that the major declines in Arctic sea ice seen in recent years could lead to “irreversible” change, claiming “unstoppable feedback loops” could soon be reached. This follows the Arctic sea ice levels dropping below 2 million km2 for the first time... (continued on page 48)

Interlude
Utopia on the Vistula?
Poland 1975 - 2026
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rSktfVJc_IM or https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wChFEkCqt5s 

Excerpt from “The True History of Mad King Kowalski” by Marek Vytautas Orłowski, University of Warsaw, published in 972 ASJ

In the Early 1970s, Poland was experiencing rapid economic growth and large-scale revival of the previously stagnant RnD Sectors. Beforehand, the Bierut and Gomułka Governments had focused on rebuilding the country’s ruined public services and heavy industry - however, recognizing that the people work better when they’re not malnourished and pushed to the brink of revolt by poverty, General Secretary Edward Gierek (a name that would be passed down for Generations of Poles, for better or for worse) instead decided to invest large amount of taxpayer money into improving living standards (with utility items such as Televisions and Toasters being seen as status symbols to try and at least ape the prosperity of the West), while also not neglecting necessary social spending. Prices went down, wages went up, and even the State Controlled unions gave workers more leeway in terms of which strikes would be permitted (although the proletariat occasionally had to be reminded that the Party is never wrong - with the butt end of a Rifle). Where did Gierek and the rest of the PZPR (Polish United Workers’ Party) leadership get the funds for this Economic Bonanza? Why, with foreign loans, of course! And when people ask for you to pay them back? Just take more loans, maybe print some money if you’re feeling adventurous. While in another world, one with a worse economic situation, this could have gone wrong, the rampant spending in the West meant they remained hungry for more creditors and could turn a blind eye to any potential issues. After all, among the dwarves of the Eastern Bloc, Poland was, without a doubt, the tallest (with only Czechoslovakia, still trying to prevent another Prague Spring, hot on its tail) and could thus easily pay back any loans, right? 

Of course, to accompany the carrot there must always be a stick. The dreaded UB (Security Bureau, AKA Secret Police) ramped up their activity in the shadows, investigating any whisper of defiance both inside the Party and from illegal opposition outlets. And, with a bit of luck (and more than a few informers swayed by the promise of Western Goods) they managed to catch various ‘Anti-National Elements’, most notably Catholic Dissident Antoni Macierewicz alongside Independent Union Organizer and reformist Jacek Kuroń, nipping any sort of oppositionist activity in the bud and ensuring that the Party an the Party alone remained the monopolist of political power. 

Of course there were some hiccups. In 1978, John Paul II, the first Pole (and first Non-Italian in a few hundred years) became Pope. In light of this, to prevent his entire merry band from being dragged out of their mansions and onto the gallows, Gierek decided to allow some minor reforms, adopting a less hardline policy and giving the Church juuuust enough breathing room to make them think twice about any sort of opposition activity, while also underlining the fact it was to be LESS repressive, not Tolerant or anything near it. The Pope’s first pilgrimage did reinvigorate the Catholics of the country, but the Government’s tactical ceding of ground deprived the head of the church of an important part of his arsenal - sure, he could still call them out on their bullshit, but they did act relatively civilized (as much as one would expect from Communists). 

Another one happened in 1979, although the Party (in spite of their claims of being all seeing and all knowing thanks to a wide web of invigilation) remained unaware for years afterward. While the Poles’ desire for independence and sovereignty had been weakened by the common prosperity and token gestures of reconciliation, there were still some fire breathers who desired a Poland where the words ‘God, Honor, Fatherland’ were more than just words on paper, but law of the land. They congregated around former Communist turned radical nationalist Leszek Moczulski, and even at this early stage they contained a multitude of various internal factions, from Kraków Intellectual Socialists to Agrarian Populists from the Eastern Countryside to a handful of Nationalists who disagreed with Moczulski’s exact flavor of the ideology. For now, though, they remained a bunch of disgruntled and powerless politicians on the periphery, lacking means to influence the country’s direction. For now.

Poland’s age of opulence continued into the 1980s, with 1983 in particular being remembered as The Golden Year. Indeed, the ‘happiest barrack of the Eastern Bloc’ entered the Top 10 in the production of Coal, Steel and Sulfur, while falling just short in raw timber (much to the chagrin of the country’s small environmentalist communities). This was, of course, immediately the target of Propaganda, as the Government wished to paint themselves as the men who brought the once war torn and impoverished, rural central European Republic into now being among the great economic powers of the time.

With the pace of the economic reforms, Gierek decided to take a leap of faith and actually allowed for the expansion of private business (although under the oversight of the Communist Government). At the helm of one of Poland’s major companies was Samson, led by the then-young Marian of the Kowalski Family, although due to his family’s rather Anti-Communist leanings (his Grandfather having been a volunteer in the Polish-Soviet War of 1920, and his papa a major figure in the Anti-Communist Peasant Battalions of WW2) he was often sidelined by the Government in favor of other businesses. He remained undeterred, however, and remained the Polish People’s main producer of domestic ‘pleasure goods’ from steroids to bench presses to various types of ‘home-made’ candy. Having already helped operate a small private business before the Thaw, the Kowalski Family had the necessary experience and connections to make the most of the chance fate threw at their hands, quickly becoming a household name across the country.

In 1985, the ageing General Secretary decided it was best for him to retire and pave the way for younger figures to take his place. In spite of that wish, however, the Party overwhelmingly elected to give the reins of power to his barely-younger Second in Command Stanisław Kania - slightly more hardliner than his predecessor, but nevertheless dedicated to continuing the pace of Growth for the Polish Economy.

As history would prove, Old Edward got the hell out of Dodge right on time, as before long the Arab Israeli War would begin and the Earth’s long descent to hell would finally turn from a paved road to an express highway.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LBmUBMnuU2k

Naturally, Poland’s Industry was as energy intensive as ever, and thus near immediately began to struggle once the Red Decade started. At first, some in the Polish Politburo considered a ‘Special Operation’ to try and restore order to the Middle East (while also definitely placing themselves as the USSR’s loyal right hand men and thus potentially gaining valuable concessions) but were immediately discouraged following the publishing of the Jurasz Report. Witold Jurasz Senior was an expert Polish Diplomat, having been one of the last men to meet Alexander Kerensky alive (to try and coax him out of hiding) and acting as Poland’s Last Ambassador to Iraq when all hell broke loose. He would use his military experience to organize the Embassy Staff into a proper militia and fight their way out of the rapidly collapsing country, noting down everything he saw and, after reaching the Soviet Border, being escorted back to Warsaw where he presented his findings to Kania and his closest associates. The situation in the sandy republic was, to put it bluntly, apocalyptic - the sheer amount of ash blocked out sunlight for days at a time, and the burning oil fields gave what was once a bustling subcontinent a hellish, orange grow. Upon hearing of this, the Communist Leadership decided that, indeed, this wouldn’t be worth it.

As the Polish Economy began to decline and the long dreaded lines returned (alongside the rationing system, once abolished after the end of WW2), resistance once more began to spring up, although stunted by common propaganda promising a swift recovery if only the people shut up and kept their heads down. Some still refused to obey the Regime’s demands, and in late 1989 yet another secret meeting was held, this time in a freshly abandoned tire factory outside the city of Radom. Delegates from the Nationalist KPN (Still going strong), the Socialist ‘Revived Polish Socialist Democratic Party’ (Claiming to be the successors of the PPS that the Communists absorbed on their way to power back in the 1940s) and even the Anarchist Inter-city-niale gathered to try and iron out some sort of compromise. They succeeded, and on November 11th of that year (on the Independence Day that the Red Regime dreaded so much) proclaimed the Anti-System Opposition Congress (Kongres Opozycji Antyustrojowej) - a sort of Underground Government, where decisions were made by consensus in preparation for the inevitable collapse of the Communism across Europe. As time would prove, they’d have to wait quite a while.

Just a year later, though, they would get some hope - multiple figures in the Military decided that enough was enough. Kania’s plans to introduce more market elements in response to the crisis only made things worse, with massive  lines for basic products and even the expansive police state struggling to hold the line against tens of thousands of hungry protesters. In early February, Tanks would roll into Warsaw and other major cities, removing ‘unruly’ Government Officials and replacing them with loyal stooges. A Planned Economy would be reinstituted while, domestically, the state would pursue a more nationalistic approach, with some even postulating the rehabilitation of such notorious Anti-Communists as Marshal Józef Piłsudski and Foreign Minister Roman Dmowski as ‘well intentioned proletarian heroes’. While they didn’t go quite that far, the Polish Crisis necessitated reform to gain at least a semblance of domestic support in case Moscow (quite spooked by the potential setting of a precedent that yeah, the army can just waltz into the Capital and jail ruling communist elites if they feel like it) decided their ‘revolutionary brothers’ were acting up and needed a good spanking. In the end that didn’t happen, but the reforms stayed. For now.

Of course, the process didn’t go quite as smoothly as many aged commanders in the Polish People’s Army Envisioned. When Samson was re-nationalized Marian Kowalski, by now a bodybuilder, personally beat the Milicjant (Militia Officer) brought to arrest him to death before running for the hills. Eventually he would meet up with similarly unemployed former businessmen and their allies, forming their own small resistance movement - the name of which would be unfortunately lost to time. 

Unsurprisingly, the new Junta (mostly consisting of economically illiterate generalissimos) did not do any better at managing the state than their predecessors. The 1995 Ten Year Plan, meant to revive the domestic economy, end unemployment and decrease the crippling debt spiral the Government had found itself in, nearly immediately ran into problems - most notably corruption, with funds and construction materials going missing in the dead of night, never to be seen again. Apartment construction, the key to solving Poland’s overpopulation (which was already a problem beforehand, let alone now, with the ‘Golden Generation’ entering adulthood and seeking to have their own place to call home) was stifled by shoddy business practices and crippling incompetence. Nuclear Power expansion was approved (both to help fuel the struggling industries of yesteryear and to potentially, at some point in the future, allow for the Warsaw Regime to crack the secret of splitting the atom) but it too caused immeasurable problems to the rather inept class of ‘socialist people’s scientists’, with the project terminated before one of those dimwits had the chance to accidentally blow up the entire city. While that sort of accident never happened, another one did, putting yet another nail in the coffin of the ‘Eternal people’s salvation government’, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5lPXrfNywHw

In 1997, Comrade Edward Gierek passed away, after over a decade in the shadows. While according to official records he died peacefully in his sleep, in reality his end was quite painful, all of the crap that had been placed in the air for the past quarter century making its way into his lungs and slowly turning the former Chairman into a living shell, incapable of any higher body functions. The State Funeral was as opulent as the Republic could afford for its ‘Greatest Revolutionary’ and ‘Man of the People’, with a short speech by the Generalissimo-Secretary himself planned to be at the start, alongside the singing of revolutionary classics and new songs (with the highlight being ‘An Ode to the Light Bringer’, a special tune written specifically in the memory of Gierek as part of a Government program to find use for the starving artists)... except things didn’t go as they should have.

Indeed, before the Generalissimo could even arrive, rouge reformist politician Marek Borowski, already marginalized inside the Party for his ‘Social-Fascist Degeneration’ took to the podium, flanked by his few remaining supporters, urging the people to rally and overthrow the brutal dictatorship that ‘disgraced our Leader’s legacy and sought to bring us back into the age of Bierut’. Before long the crowds got rowdy, and then riotous, with eyewitnesses reporting scenes not unlike those of the 1970 Workers’ Revolt - party committees were set alight, Milicja Officers ambushed and beaten within an inch of their lives, makeshift barricades erected. But alas, it was all for naught - before long the Junta realized what was going on and decided to begin their crackdown. Hundreds, perhaps even thousands of people died as Tanks began to shell through the packed streets, killing all souls unfortunate enough to be in their way, and Borowski’s body was never identified among the bloody sludge that had once been dozens of recognizable individuals. After a full week of radio silence from major media outlets (both the actual Radio as well as the collapsing TV Stations), the Government finally released a statement that ‘Anti-National Elements’ had been squashed, denouncing ‘foreign intervention in the affairs of the People’s Republic’. Behind closed doors, the Regime was forced to give more and more concessions to both the Milicja Obywatelska (Police) and its two offshoots (ORMO and ZOMO) regarding pay and holidays off, further stretching the already struggling budget thin. 

At least some of this money would be put to good use, as during a regular supply truck inspection multiple Policemen found the elderly Moczulski hiding in a box titled ‘Spare Parts’, being smuggled to a special session of the Anti-Opposition Congress. He was soon thrown in jail, and given a simple offer - rejoin the Party, and have KPN become a sort of ‘controlled opposition’ to PZPR, or die. He refused to dignify them with a response, and thus was publicly executed in Warsaw on an otherwise completely normal day. However, while this event was drummed up with much fanfare to try and discourage rebellion, it had the exact opposite effect - it killed whatever goodwill the Party had built up with Nationalists up to that point, making their efforts in vain and reinvigorating resistance. 

For the next half decade little of note happened. In 2004 Kowalski’ Resistance, suffering from a lack of supplies due to a handful unlucky fuck-ups related to weapon shipments, decided to join the Anti-Opposition Congress, with the man himself soon realizing just how big of an opportunity this was and using his expertise to expand the organization’s reach. Of course, some saw this generosity as a bit suspicious, but you don’t look a gift horse in the mouth, not when fighting the Communists.

In 2006 the Warsaw Pact, the dying beast that had kept the country chained to Moscow for decades, was finally put to rest, with the People’s Coalition formed in its stead. Of course, not everyone followed the charted course - Hungary, stuck as an agrarian society following a brutal civil war that devastated the country early in the decade, still insisted on shipping out every seed of grain even amid a brutal famine for the sake of international trade. There was a somewhat understandable reason for this - the devastated republic couldn’t afford to maintain its own industrial base, lacking expertise and resources, and thus had to rely on foreign imports to keep the basics of modern civilization functioning. To stop them would mean the possibility of another civil war, or outright societal collapse like in Bulgaria.

However, any excuse is good when you’re looking for one, and so, in mid 2008, the Polish Government authorized ‘Operation Brotherhood’, sending ‘peacekeeping forces’ to ‘protect our brother nation’ from ‘irresponsible governance’. A provisional Government was set up (with Slovakia conquered on the way), and while the vast majority of the populace was apathetic due to the decades of misery, a handful of communist hardliners (alongside the odd nationalist remnants which didn’t like the change from one foreign overlord to another) did decide to resist, with their insurgency causing hundreds of casualties and tons of unrest at home as veterans returned mutilated, in body bags, or worse - didn’t return at all.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3at2qjKuOpU

Eventually, the straw that broke the Camel’s back would prove to be, of all things, Alcohol. 
By 2009, much of the Government’s profits were through the sale of cheap booze back to their own populace. However, continued growth and the decline of the formerly fertile Lubelszczyzna region due to climate change and soil exhaustion, meant grain had to be reserved for only the staples of food such as bread. But even with cheap (and often, to put it bluntly, health hazardous) alternatives popping up, there simply wasn't enough alcohol to go around. As such, with a heavy heart, the elderly generalissimo addressed the people for what he did not yet know would be the last time, proclaiming, among some other nonsense lost to history, that beer rations would be cut. And then, all hell broke loose.

The people were fed up and flocked to the streets. Ironically, while the Police remained steadfastly loyal by the Government’s side, much of the UB decided to desert - not out of any idealistic desire for change, but because they too liked to get drunk, and also disliked being marginalized in favor of ‘stupid peasant cops’ (the inter service rivalry was very much alive, even after all those years). Before long the Anti Opposition Congress hijacked the whole thing, beginning the Beer Revolution, with Regime Loyalists hanged on lamppots and the elderly generals who drove the country into the ground finding themselves on the receiving end of the same torture they often dished out to dissidents and imagined traitors alike.

After the initial enthusiasm died down, the Congress sat down to try and iron out something resembling a proper constitution, with a set date for the first Presidential Elections since 1935 (technically 1947, if you were to give the Communists that much credit, or maybe even first free election since 1922 if you count voting infractions as invalidating). Whichever way you slide it and dice it, things soon went out of hand as everyone realized their interests no longer aligned, with KOA failing to mount a single nominee and de facto collapsing, with everyone going their own ways. The Anarchists, Socialists (with the Three PPS Successors finally unifying into one) and Christian Democrats (having reconciled the Oppositionist Christian Party with the former regime Satellite known as the Pax Association) all fielded their own nominees, while KPN held a congress to attempt and get back control over the situation. Before long things continued to deteriorate, with the Confederation’s line divided between the reformist camp under the relatively young Andrzej Mazurkiewicz and the old guard (staunchly dedicated to Moczulski’s principles, or at least their vision of what they are) under former partizan leader Adam Słomka (Nickname ‘Coal’). As both threatened to rip the movement asunder with their bickering, weeks went on with very little progress. Eventually, in a desperate bid to break the deadlock, Kowalski (by that point the richest man in Poland, not that money was worth much anymore, thanks to his ownership of re-privatized Samson, now mostly retooled toward wonder foods fueling the stomachs of average poles) stormed into the Congress Hall, proclaiming himself the nominee. Desperate to get some semblance of unity the delegates agreed to go along with this blant power grab, and Kowalski, with a platform of nationalism and somewhat vague populism (promising to ‘stop the thieves’ while also promoting privatization of certain non critical sectors of the economy) finished miles ahead of the other nominees, defeating them all in the first term. 

This victory meant he had quite the mandate to implement his desired changes. He had certain businesses ‘privatized’ (ie. taken from former Government Cronies and handed to his allies, who admittedly did at least know something about management), sent Maruzkiewicz off to Slovakia to manage the occupation (eventually admitting his former rival might be more than just an empty sounding brass, appointing him the Governor of all of Poland’s Southern Acquisitions) and subsequently pacified Słomka’s faction by stuffing the Government with friendly men he knew from his days as a Rebel Leader. Enraged, the KPN Dissidents demanded Parliamentary Elections (hoping to keep the President in check with the legislative - while it was far from the all-powerful beast it had been in the bygone Second Republic, it actually held influence as opposed to the rubber stamp of the communist era), to which the President agreed, also wishing to secure power over the Chamber.

The 2011 Polish Elections were overseen by a handful of observers (mostly from the Nordic Countries, alongside a single malnourished Englishman), and were deemed ‘free but not fair’, with the KPN (both factions) having an unfair advantage over the ‘official’ opposition thanks to their control of the Economy - any county that voted wrong was liable to be proclaimed ‘uninhabitable’, with locals sent to labor camps that were only different from concentration camps by the virtue of their name. That said, non-KPN Parties did make it into the Sejm (the only Chamber, as the Senate was never restored) - out of 401 MPs, 27 Represented the Polish Socialist Party, 17 the Christian Democratic Union and 5 the Free Peasant Movement (Representing Poland’s dying class of Yeoman farmers, already gutted by the Communist Era and now progressing desertification). There were also Two Anarchists (both found dead by suicide before their term was up) and a singular independent (who jumped ship to the Socialists in 2013).349 Seats should, logicaly, be a supermajority, but do not let that deceive you - Słomka pulled every string possible to get his men onto as many lists as he could, meaning he was the de facto puppetmater of the Sejm (even being elected as its Marshall, the de facto Presidential Right Hand Man barring the largely powerless Prime Minister) and thus made it his mission to constantly pester Kowalski about laws and then stonewall the legislative process if he wasn’t heard out. 

Such was life in Poland (now officially renamed the ‘Commonwealth’ by one of Kowalski’s first decrees, nullifying the old Communist Constitution of 1952), at least until 2013. Not that the common man would know, anyways. As Kowalski’s men were doing their best to try and (this time literally) clean up an old Communist Database to be used as an emergency food distribution center following a particularly bad drought in the Northern Regions of the country, they stumbled upon something disturbing. A plan, stretching back all the way to 1996, prepared by the old regime, detailing a three step program to turn human corpses (plentiful even back then) into food for the Poor. It was meant as a stopgap measure in times of War or Natural Disaster induced famine, but it horrified the crew nevertheless and they soon relayed the news higher up in the chain of command, all the way until it reached Kowalski himself. While disgusted, he did begrudgingly see a bit of potential use should (when) shit hit the fan, and quietly shelved it. The Four Man Clean-up crew would not live to see the Great Death - one was killed in a food riot in 2019 and the other three committed suicide (wheather they did the deed on their own accord or with some ‘encouragment’ from Policemen remains a mystery for all time).

For all this time, refugees had been flooding from the anarchic mess once known as the Southern Balkans into Polish Hungary. Initially the local government welcomed this extra workforce, but before long the Governor realized even the last fertile lands in central Europe simply didn’t have enough to feed them all, not even on near-starvation rations which made Death Camp food look like luxury delicacies. Under increasing pressure from both loyalists and oppositionists in KPN (alongside members of the Public) the President would order the creation of a massive border wall on what was once the hinterlands of Hungary, sealing it (and, as an extension, the rest of the ‘Empire of the Eagle’ as one Nordic satirist called it) from the endless waves of human beings. Before long it would be extended to also prevent Bulgarians and Greeks from thumping through the corpse of Romania and going around. As local civil wars degenerated into warlord eras and, later, total anarchy, this was increasingly seen as the right choice even among the few surviving members of the Polish Opposition. 

Thanks to the agenda of ‘helping keep the borders safe’, Kowalski would receive a popularity boost and triumph in the 2015 Presidential Election, winning an overwhelming majority of the vote (in no small part thanks to the allegations of vote rigging), defeating moderate LIberal-Conservative Witold Jurasz (Junior, who had little of his father’s political skills and mostly wished to help preserve whatever historic documents remained in the country with token foreign cooperation, running as a matter of principle) and a bunch of unrecognized anarchists without ballot access.

In the concurrently held Parliamentary Elections, KPN theoretically only lost 2 seats, but in reality saw a massive realignment as Słomka’s allies were expelled and replaced with either harmless economic wonks or staunch Kowalski Loyalists.

The Berlin Warsaw Axis was also formed.

In 2016, Kowalski took one final look at the Polish Internal Defense apparatus and was disappointed in what he saw - in spite of their large budgets and lack of any real red tape, Polish Law Enforcement had been failing in their fight against the tide of crime rapidly spilling into the country from the West and South. Corruption and communist influences were also cited. Seeing all of this he would reform the old Milicja, ZOMO, ORMO and UB into two groups - firstly the Pre-War Policja (Police) would be restored, with the usual hoodlum hunting duties, while all the nitty gritty assassinations and ‘fine’ investigations (costly ones, with DNA and shit) would be handed over to the newly formed ‘Centralne Biuro Bezpieczeństwa Publicznego’ (Central Bureau of Public Safety, CBBP), which was basically the same thing but staffed with Anti-Communists as opposed to communists (with the last surviving Reds often turned into Ration Omega and shipped abroad, usually to Africa or China in exchange for whatever ancient replacement parts they could offer to keep the moribound Polish Economy afloat) and all the major positions filled with men loyal to the President first and everything else second. 

In 2019 an useless Election was held where no seats were exchanged compared to 2015, with only a single Socialist MP who died of old age replaced by a colleague. 

In 2023 Kowalski decided to follow the scrap of paper he hand wrote called the Constitution, sticking to the two term limit while endorsing MP and former ‘Commissar’ (Appointed Official replacing a mayor) Andrzej Pruszkowski, a fellow ‘Lubelak’ and Partizan (although he was mostly on logistical duty for his ten years in the bush), who subsequently won in a landslide. In reality, of course, Kowalski remained the real power behind the throne - not as Prime Minister, nor as Marshall of the Sejm, but as Minister of the Interior. 

Two years later, the Polish intelligence service discovered that the Soviets were doing something… off. There was a significant realignment in troop numbers, large scale construction projects, human resettlement that seemed actually planned and not like spontaneous waves of refugees. It was clear the Bolsheviks were planning for… something, but just what eluded the Poles - they had no contacts left inside the ‘Home of the Global proletariat’ and there was only so much scouting from a distance could achieve. Against their better judgement, they handed this information to their ‘allies’ in the Greater German Democratic Republic, who promptly ignored it - some saw it as misinformation by the ‘fake aryans’, others saw it as just more posturing from the ‘idiot slavs’ in Moscow, all agreed it was probably nothing to worry about.

The Last Polish Parliamentary Elections (snap elections to be exact) were also held this year to elect members of the 5th Sejm. Nobody bothered to observe them anymore, but had anyone tried to, they would have found them neither free nor fair. The KPN won all but one seat in Sejm (with said brave independent being Słomka Himself, having left the party due to its ‘betrayal of the martyr Moczulski’s vision’ and fighting off three separate assasination attempts on the campaign trail), with this sharp turn towards authoritarianism mostly blamed on Kowalski’s increasing descent into madness. Obsessed over what the Reds could be plotting, heavily suspecting it was some variation of dragging Central European ‘traitors’ down to hell before the impending ecological collapse, he began construction of large scale bunker complexes (or at least as large as the country’s remaining industries allowed), storing people, supplies and priceless historical artifacts alike [1] to try and get them through whatever was going to come. They were placed at large distances from one another, to ensure that whatever that plan was (flooding, open war, drought or plague) at least one would survive… which also made contact between them hellishly hard should the ancient communication equipment give out. But that part must have been skipped in the planning process.

Just a year later the Polish-Nordic War would break out. While in theory over a fishing dispute, that was but a lousy excuse - there were very few fish left in the Baltic, certainly not enough to wage such a conflict over. No, in reality the Poles managed to capture an advanced Nordic Nuclear Submarine which beached on their shores, soon executing the crew and taking it for themselves, responding to Stockholm’s demands of giving it back by telling them to shove a finger up their arse. As such, the two states went to war, which was still ongoing at the time of the Great Death - while the Nordic Navies were far better than the meager rust buckets the Poles could field, the Pomeranian Coastline had been turned into a massive death trap, with any landing (or even plans at landing) little more than pipe dreams (or perhaps a very elaborate way of suicide). 

[1] After the Great Death, myths regarding the ‘Mad King Kowalski’s Treasure’ remained alive for generations, with adventurers from across the continent searching (often outside what was even considered Polish territory) for it in every building which as much as had a section of it located underground. This often resulted in them triggering ‘revenge weapons’ or causing the ancient structures to crumble under their own weight, most notably in the Warsaw Metro, where a clueless treasure hunter’s dynamiting of a wall to clear a path to what he was sure was the vault (in reality merely a disused service tunnel) caused multiple stations to collapse, killing seventy people and displacing a large amount of the survivor community, triggering a refugee crisis that later escalated into civil wars, overpopulation, plague and general chaos.

Interlude
The Argentine Sun, the Two Césars and la gran última Siesta
Section 1: Central America

The Monterrey “Quetzalcoatl” Superfactory, built during the height of Mexican industry. Photographed in 1987
Mexico

(Flag credit)
Official name: United States of Mexico/Estados Unidos Mexicanos (until 1995), Federation of Socialist Mexican States/Federación de Estados Socialistas Mexicanos (1995-2027) 
Capital: Mexico City
Government Type: Presidential Republic (until 2006), Far-Left Military Junta (2006-2027)
Population as of final census conducted: 241,528,255 (Circa 2000)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 192,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.816 Trillion USD
Primary Language: Mexican Spanish (Español Mexicano)
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES (as of 13 March, 1996)
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (Until 1995), COMECON (1995-2008)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

While Mexico didn’t reach the same dizzying heights of industry as China, or even the USSR, they were notable for being the most industrialized country in the Americas during the Glorious Decades. A lack of economic uncertainty kept the Mexican Economy booming and avoided any financial crisis in the 1970s and 1980s. 

Mexico was essential to Chen’s plans in the Americas, and as such, when the 1985 earthquake hit Mexico City, he led the charge in assembling an international team to aid the Mexican government and rebuild the city. It was estimated that 2,500-20,000 people were killed as a result of the damage, with almost 15,000 injured. Cuban doctors were flown in to care for the wounded, huge fundraisers were held in New York City, and China signed a very generous loan with Mexico to help rebuild the city and its industry. Even the USSR sent one million loaves of bread in solidarity. The United States helped pay for the rebuilding of entire apartment blocks, in exchange for assurances of a Mexican-American Oil Pipeline. Things were looking up for Mexico. 

Until they weren’t. 

Any hope at a full recovery was shattered when the last Sinai War turned into the first nuclear conflict in history. At first, the conservative PRI government saw this as a boon: Mexico was soon one of the top oil producers in the world. They assured their people that this was just a temporary blip in Mexico’s history, and that the oil boom would actually make Mexico even richer. 

The PRI’s Presidential Candidate, Marcos Juárez Huerta, narrowly won the Presidency in July 1988. Despite industry collapsing all over the world and tourism evaporating, the government continued business as usual. While Mexico’s economy was not hit hard initially, by November 1988 it was clear that President Franklin King was not winning re-election. President-Elect Graves platformed on a campaign of strict protectionism, as the United States had an 18.9% unemployment rate compared to Mexico’s 5.6%. 

Despite Mexico’s oil boom, demand for their other products were rapidly declining. By Christmas of 1988, factories were forced to lay off workers before closing down themselves. In 1989, this led to further economic troubles when President Graves implemented sweeping tariffs against many countries, including Mexico. Mexico was not alone in their frustration, however, as South Korea’s anti-American sentiment turned violent. This would lead to a group of far-left Mexican nationalists to bomb the Mexican-American Oil Pipeline on May 5th, 1989. The Cinco de Mayo Bombing[1] resulted in relations between Mexico and America breaking down, with the Democratic majority passing a bill that included tariffs against Mexico that expired in 2029. Huerta’s government remained optimistic that both sides could come to an agreement.

Both Mexico and the United States would cease to exist by 2029, however. 

Negotiations were met with shouting matches, and while the PRI never outright tariffed American goods back, there was a massive boycott of American-grown corn and soybeans. This led to a number of farms, which were relying on trade with Mexico to keep their businesses above the red line, finally going under. 

In the summer of 1989, while the anti-American sentiment hadn’t quite gotten to South Korean standards, a massive riot in Mexico City on June 8th, 1989 led to 14 deaths and over 100 casualties, not to mention almost a billion pesos of property damage. Mexico City was temporarily placed under martial law, and the government began to throw away money to the police forces, but the restrictions were never lifted. 

An unfortunate side effect of the Mexico City Riots of 1989 was that the Governor of Tabasco, Raul Juan Hernandez, was injured. He was simply at the wrong place at the wrong time, buying a pack of cigarettes before being strung up to a lamppost by the enraged mob of unemployed. His bodyguards managed to get him down in time before he died, but as he was rushed to the Chen Qiang Memorial Hospital he slipped into a coma due to oxygen deprivation and was pronounced dead on July 2nd, 1989. 

This forced the government of Tabasco to run an emergency snap election. Edmundo Ernesto Gutiérrez, the Deputy of Federal District 2, ended up winning the governorship in a landslide. Gutiérrez was elected in 1985, running on a campaign of social security and welfare after the chaos of the 1985 earthquake. He was the only member of the PRD that was elected in 1985, and won practically unopposed in 1988. With the governorship, he expanded his social programs tenfold. Using the leftover profits of the oil boom, Gutiérrez created a state-wide universal basic income and subsidized public transportation for the entire state. However, this caused citizens from all over the country to flock to Tabasco, quickly bloating it to be the second most populous state in Mexico, behind Mexico City itself. 

Gutiérrez began campaigning around the country to establish a safety net of social welfare for Mexican citizens. To deal with the deficit of American agricultural products, Gutiérrez championed an agricultural revival and nationalizing the entire oil industry, nationwide. 

His policies were put to the test when the Hot Summer of 1990 ravaged Mexico and the world. People from the northern states flocked to the metropolises in central Mexico. Soon, only 10% of Mexico’s population lived north of Mexico City. Tariffs and a sharp decline of oil demand caused the rest of the Mexican economy to enter freefall. Things weren’t as bad as in the USA, not yet, as Mexico still had much of its industrial base and slowly began to shift to a command economy. States across the country began adopting policies similar to Gutiérrez’s, and oil began to be prioritized for transporting essential goods. Unemployment started to skyrocket, reaching 22% by the end of 1990. The federal government, meanwhile, downplayed the economic crisis and claimed yet again that this was only temporary and that they were working closely with President Graves to reopen trade between the two countries. 

On January 8th, 1991, President Huerta and President Graves had their first bilateral conference since the Cinco de Mayo Bombing of 1989. The conference started with a calm, peaceful atmosphere of cooperation, but devolved into a one-sided shouting match when President Graves said that he was elected to help America, not Mexico, and that for the foreseeable future that was where his priorities lay. Either due to a mistranslation, or culture shock, the two Presidents almost engaged in an altercation until they were both separated from each other by their relevant security details. As Graves was escorted out of the building, he threatened war with Mexico, but backed down immediately upon returning to Washington, D.C. 

This dealt a massive blow to PRI’s public image, and Huerta’s approval rating dropped significantly. In an attempt to stimulate the economy and mitigate the damage of the Hot Summer, he passed several tax cuts. Ultimately, though, many of the largest companies in Mexico had to lay off waves of workers. 

In the 90s, throughout the energy shortages, unemployment and industrial decay, organized crime began to emerge on the fringes of society. Cartels, gangs, and smugglers started to appear quietly in many cities across the northern states, in small pockets of anarchy that had sprung up from the resulting migration (and reallocation of federal and state resources). The UN’s power was crumbling, and their Anti-Drug Task Force was more of a list of guidelines rather than the powerful force it had been during the 1970s and 1980s. Cocaine and marijuana dealers began popping up left and right, and other organized crimes like bank robbery and racketeering were becoming extremely common. In the north, small towns that had been abandoned by companies became arteries in the heart of the Mexican underbelly. Desperate people, willing to do anything to make money and keep themselves fed, started taking under the table jobs and knowingly began to help the cartels. Others, driven to a state of hopelessness, began using the drugs themselves. 

As legitimate jobs began drying up, gangs and cartels began controlling entire towns in the north. This was noticed by the government, of course, and the Huerta government began to use it as a talking point to distract from the growing poverty. The federal forces made exaggerated spectacles of capturing lowly crooks and bombastic drug busts, attempting to invoke the might of the UNADTF. While they were successful from a tactical standpoint, it only drove the cartels further underground. 

As the 1994 Election approached, the PRI desperately tried to appeal to the nostalgia of the wealth and prosperity Mexico had seen during the Glorious Decades. Their candidate was described as dull, boring, and by-the-books. It was no surprise that the PRD, who paraded Gutiérrez around like a saint, pushed him forward for the presidency. Famines in 1993 and 1994 only pushed public support further to the left, and in 1994, the PRD won in a landslide, gaining the governorship of 29 states, control of Congress, and Gutiérrez himself became president. 

In an era now referred to as the “Fourth Transformation”, President Gutiérrez, now commonly referred to as the “Titan of Tabasco”, dramatically reformed the country and implemented sweeping reforms that made Graves’s policies look moderate. Every single industry was nationalized, forming a country-wide universal basic income, and a ration system similar to America’s was created. Anti-corruption committees started redistributing land to poor farmers, and the largest business magnates had their assets frozen and seized. Housing programs began constructing large settlements for those displaced by the growing heatwaves. Those that resisted giving up their land were branded as enemies of the Mexican people, and mostly fled to the north where they attempted to seek passage into the United States. 

The fact that many cartels started to become unusually more organized, and started to use old government gear, is merely a coincidence. 

On February 1st, 1995, President Gutiérrez officially renamed Mexico to the Federation of Socialist Mexican States, and formally cut ties with the United States and their Alliance of Industrial Nations, instead joining the USSR’s COMECON. February 1st became a statutory holiday, and a new flag was unveiled in March. Mexico’s GDP actually began to very slowly increase from 1995-2000, though if this was a result of the black market or Gutiérrez’s policies is unknown. 

In 1996, Mexico joined the Alliance of Nations and also created the “empresa nacional de alimentos”, or the “National Food Company”. The NFC was created to help coordinate government resources to prevent major famines, and used an irrigation system similar to the USSR. The last of Mexico’s oil reserves were used to power farming equipment and trucks to transport the food. This prevented any major famines for the rest of the 90s, but just barely. For a while, Mexico’s main problem was not climate change or food, but a growing amount of disillusioned unemployed who became easy targets for the Cartels. 

In the depopulated north, backdoor deals between corrupt politicians and cartel members resulted in the cartel’s power rapidly expanding. Entire cities became controlled by cartels in all but name, and a lucrative black market sprung up. For those who knew what they were looking for, they could find just about anything the corrupt politicians wanted: rare delicacies from the Glorious Decades, clothing from any country, and even prostitutes that catered to every taste, not to mention the abundant designer drugs and military surplus. It was said that a broker in Todos Santos could even get nuclear weapons. 

Throughout 1996 and 1997, Vice President Smith and later President Smith tried to undo the divide between the United States and the now openly socialist Mexico. President Gutiérrez never acquiesced, instead slyly replying that he was elected to serve Mexico, not the United States. Smith gave up by 1998. 

In 1999, to deal with the rising number of youth joining gangs and cartels, President Gutiérrez began investigating the cartel activity in the north. This would lead to the creation of the “Mexican People’s Army”, a federal militia that served as the vanguard against rising crime. Recruits were promised a pension and stable pay, but most simply joined for the food and shelter. Throughout the end of Gutiérrez’s presidency, the MPA conducted several operations against the cartels. Some cartels were wiped out, but most of them resisted and held out against the MPA’s minimally trained army. 

As Mexico entered the 21st Century, a new problem arose: immigration. Much of Latin America was in chaos, with civil war and anarchy running rampant as far south as Bolivia. Millions of refugees fled north, seeking the relative stability that Mexico and the United States offered. Mexico began to actually see groups of African Americans flee into Mexico, escaping from brutally violent Klansmen. This immigration crisis led to further corruption, instability and resource shortages, and became a primary talking point in the 2000 Election. 

The far-left candidate for the PRD, Alejandro Ortega Ruiz, won in a landslide, though not quite to the same level as his predecessor. He campaigned on “making Mexico for the Mexicans” and regulating immigration, but also emphasized that Mexico’s next task would be to tackle the corruption and crime that the Cartels were causing. 

In 2001, Mexico would pass an anti-immigration law, and then throughout the early 2000s President Ruiz led the Mexican military in several operations against cartels in the north and the southeast. The budgets of municipal police forces were bloated to the extreme, and the Mexico City Police Department waged a brutal war to eradicate a number of gangs. After a gang-induced riot in 2001, police departments across the country began heavily militarizing, and in places with little federal control, groups of vigilantes began to organize and defend their communities from criminals. In many cases though, the leaders of these vigilante groups gradually grew an ego and started to enact their own versions of “mob justice”, becoming a gang in all but name. These were put down by squads of the MPA, and in the far north, the Vigilantes and Cartels openly fought a war without any pretext of supposed justice. 

The largest of these vigilante mobs resulted in the Tuxtla Gutiérrez Massacre of 2002. Over 50 immigrants were strung up and hung in makeshift gallows before the MPA intervened, using the same gallows to hang the four leaders of the vigilantes. 

People fleeing from the heat, drought, desertification, political violence and crime ended up settling in Mexico City, which had a population of 25 million as of the 2000 census. In the greater Mexico City metropolitan area, the population was estimated to be 46.7 million. The amount of people crammed into such a small area caused an enormous strain on resources, with plumbing constantly breaking down and water being rationed during the summer months. Outbreaks of disease resulted in entire districts being quarantined, and as resources became scarcer, the elderly and terminally ill began to be abandoned and left to their fates. 

In the mid 2000s, envoys from China arrived. These civic engineers and technicians worked with President Ruiz to momentarily help revitalize the Mexican economy, and they worked together to build vast apartment blocks for the growing number of displaced migrants. Many in Ruiz’s government would remain skeptical of China, however, and some states opted to not let the Chinese into their borders at all. 

In 2004, many in the country, including the highest members of the government and military, began to grow dissatisfied with the way President Ruiz was handling the country. The cartels were gaining more and more ground, and suddenly were seen equipped with surplus Chinese weaponry. This culminated in the Battle of Durango, in which an entire battalion of the MPA was forced to surrender to the Los Ganchos Cartel. With that, high-ranking members of the Mexican military began plotting a coup. 

President Ruiz was largely criticized for how his government handled Hurricane Wilson. Instead of diverting resources to help the devastated coast, Ruiz funneled yet more money into the armed forces and launched several concurrent campaigns all over the country against cartels and gangs alike. Desertions were common, and many soldiers left their posts to see if their families were part of the 50,000 casualties in the Gulf of Mexico. Ruiz then ordered an invasion of Belize by sending “peacekeeping” forces to help spread Mexican Socialism there. 

By March of 2006, civil unrest was at an all-time high as protesters and riots began sweeping the nation in response to Ruiz’s actions. There was no 2006 Election - in April that year, General Ricardo López Valdez of the Mexican Army launched a coup against President Ruiz and established a military Junta in Mexico City. Forces loyal to Ruiz fled to Honduras and Belize, and members of the MPA were diverted to chase them down. Valdez took control of the press and began to suppress the flow of information, notably the numerous losses that the MPA was suffering in the north against Cartels. By 2007, the states bordering the USA were controlled entirely by cartels, and entire neighborhoods in Mexico City were quarantined due to the Red Flu, only to be controlled by gangsters in the aftermath. 

Valdez’s government would end up being no better than Ruiz’s. Members of the government began defecting to cartels and corruption spread far and wide. In parts of the south, cities changed hands daily, becoming battle grounds between innumerable gangs and cartels, many of which died out within a year. Valdez became increasingly imperialistic, launching invasions of Nicuraga and Guatemala. 

By 2010, most of the territory north of Mexico City was under complete control of various cartels, gangs, and bandits, with vast stretches of land in anarchy. The temperature there had gotten so bad that many were nocturnal, and in areas where the cartels had complete control, they worked their slaves to the bone in plantations similar to Food, Inc’s superfarms. South of Mexico City, the MPA pillaged Central America and fought constant battles against rebels and cartels. Throughout Latin America, a growing sense of despair and dread dominated those who were caught in the crossfire. Many took to joining a side and embracing the violence, while others slipped into drug-induced wonderlands fueled by Bromista, the designer superdrug that was sweeping the world. 

The Purple Summer of 2011 forced the fanatical MPA to pull out of Honduras and Nicaragua. Famine swept the globe, and Mexico was no different. Unconfirmed reports of cannibalism in the countryside were suppressed by Valdez’s propaganda machine. In the aftermath, when the country stabilized in early 2012, Valdez was forced to declare martial law throughout the country after he was nearly assassinated by an IED. Civil unrest in Central Mexico exploded, with farmers and workers rising up before being beaten down by the MPA. People began to disappear, with the official explanation (if one was given at all) always being “suspected collaboration with cartels”. 

As a result of the attempted assassination, Valdez became deeply paranoid, pulling out of Belize and focusing on testing the loyalty of his men. Occupied Belize collapsed into a civil war between those who collaborated with the MPA, PRD and Valdez, and rebels who were suspected to be backed by cartels. The cartels that remained were extremely ruthless and barbaric, and as they spread chaos, millions fled the country. Some would even brave the ungodly heat and go into the USA, leading to the El Paso Massacre of 2013. 

The numerous gangs and cartels begin to fracture due to fanaticism and greed, turning the north into a lawless wasteland bereft of any semblance of order. Bandits robbed other bandits, slaves were worked to death in the scorching heat, and raving cannibals, driven mad with drug use, roamed the deserts and ate anyone they saw. In the south, the chaos was a bit more organized, with cartels taking over the blasted wasteland of Central America that had been nearly burnt to the ground by the MPA. 

After the Great Heatwave of 2015, the cartels became the dominant force in Latin America. Millions willingly lost themselves in “la Gran Siesta”, a euphemism for the intense hallucinations Bromista caused. By 2016, outside of a few places loyal to Valdez, south Mexico was entirely divided up between various cartels, using Bromista to forge an uneasy peace. Many towns were turned into cartel superfarms, their workers kept in a state of drug-induced bliss before dying of malnutrition, disease or overdose. To save on operating costs, many of the cartels began to feed their workers the remains of the fellows, and those that woke up from the nightmare usually ended their lives. 

Valdez and the MPA, who controlled only the Mexico City metro area and a number of collectivized farms in Central Mexico, were mainly left alone by the cartels, who believed that he was no longer worth the trouble. The leaders of the cartels lived like kings, their opulence granted by the drug-induced work force of a hundred million slaves. To recoup their losses after the Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016, various cartels take over almost all of Central America. 

In 2018, the Jarret Administration authorized the destabilization of the cartels, shattering their loose confederacy. Soon, drug-fueled berserkers raged across plantations and Latin America became a bloodbath once again. Entire cartels were wiped out, while slaves launched uprisings that birthed new cartels and gangs to take their place. Valdez’s junta actually gained more power, as the infighting allowed them to “liberate” numerous states in southern Mexico. In the north, the heat had gotten so bad that even the cartels abandoned their night operations there, retreating to the tip of Baja California Sur and occupied Guatemala. Apocalyptic sandstorms shredded entire cities, and drought killed more people than violence. 

By 2020, everyone in Mexico was either a violent soldier or a bromista-addicted slave. Valdez was darkly paranoid, regularly going entire days without sleep for fear of being killed. As food supplies dwindled, he authorized the recycling of “agitators” into food. Drugs were so ubiquitous that even Mexico City was one step away from being cartel controlled. Pacificing chemicals were mixed into the rations, made of the people, for the people. Entire communities disappeared, never to be seen again, and soon no one in Mexico City starved. 

The chemicals led to many unexpected side effects. People began flying into fits of rage or bouts of uncontrollable mania. Violent crime exploded, with rapes, arson, and mutilation becoming everyday occurrences. The perpetrators were always caught, and then turned into more of the “wonder ration”, and the cycle continued. The crimes escalated to suicide bombings and the mass poisoning of water lines, and finally, an armoy was raided. In 2021, during the apex of the insanity, Valdez was killed by a frenzied MPA soldier when an incendiary explosive was detonated in his palace in Mexico City. 

Those in his inner circle, who while not drugged out of their mind were still violently sadistic. However, they were shaken to their core when they realized what was truly happening, and in that moment, it was like they woke up from the Bromista nightmare. An uprising spread through the city, and many chose to burn it all to the ground in one last party - la gran última fiesta. Millions died in that orgy of violence and fire, but it was not the end of the Mexican people, or even the MPA. There were still some who had the will to live, and there were some in the MPA who still had a conscience and believed in its cause. They led their people north, traveling by night and eating sparingly (the excessive violence had actually caused a slight increase in vegetable rations). 

Many did not survive the trek through the Chihuahuan wasteland, and those that did were captured by cartel members, killed by the American militias during the Night War of 2021, or simply lost the will to live and let the heat take them. 

In the end, all that went north died. 

Over the next five years, countless revolutionaries and dictators tried to take over the crumbling, burning remains of the Mexican Junta. Some were tyrants, and some were traitors who worked with the cartels, but none of them were able to establish the same level of control that Valdez had. The biggest, most ruthless cartels had conquered their rivals, with various groups controlling all of Central America south of the ruins of the Mexico City metro area. Out of fear, they left the other cartels alone, and were content to rule their own little drug-controlled fiefdoms. However, the Second Great Heatwave of 2023 fractured that tenuous peace. Even the most elite members of the cartels began to experience the effects of the rapidly deteriorating climate, and soon most of Central America was ravaged by storm after storm. 

Yet in spite of the hellish place the world had become, there were still those who held out hope and believed in a cause. On February 1st, 2027, outside the town of Chapata, a captain of the MPA would successfully use poison to wipe out the largest gang in Central Mexico, and began an operation to retake Mexico City. He would not be the first, but he would be the only one to do so with the goal of genuinely trying to improve the lives of its citizens. His charisma began to inspire those around him, and the spark to live again reignited in Mexico City. Captain Gonzales, as he was called, began to expand into the ruined husks of the northern cartels. 

On June 14th, 2027, Captain Gonzales would watch from the ruins of Naucalpan de Juárez as Mexico City was destroyed in a mushroom cloud. 

Guatemala

Official name: Republic of Guatemala/República de Guatemala, People’s Republic of Guatemala/República Popular de Guatemala (Disputed)
Capital: Guatemala City (de jure, until 1992), Flores (de facto, 1992-2010)
Government Type: Presidential Republic (de jure, 1978-1992), Far-Right Military Dictatorship (de facto, 1992-2010)
Population as of final census conducted: 28,954,243 (Circa 2000)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 25,900,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $7.426 Billion USD
Primary Language: Guatemalan Spanish (Español guatemalteco)
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: World Prosperity Organization (Until 1992)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

In 1973, the Guatemalan Civil War ground to a halt when Cuba suddenly withdrew their support for the rebels. Backdoor negotiations between Secretary Agassi and Fidel Castro redirected the Second World to a possible world war with China, and as such, the progress of socialism would have to be directed by the workers alone. 

The US-China Peace Commission, headed by Chairman Chen and President Nixon, began mediating a peace between the Guatemalan government and the Guerilla Army of the Poor. Throughout 1973 and 1974, negotiations were reached and the department of Quiche was to be turned into a fully autonomous zone, ruled by the indigenous Maya. 

The peace efforts were half-hearted, though, and in 1975 ethnic violence broke out once again. After the Massacre of Cobán in 1976, the United Nations authorized a peacekeeping mission into Guatemala. Operation: Azure Stars resulted in the US-backed regime being destroyed, and the United Nations established an interim government. Throughout 1977 and 1978, members of the old regime were put on trial, and while many of them blamed the USA and members of the CIA, ultimately all the evidence was circumstantial and the USA got away with little more than a slap on the wrist and a promise to subsidize the rebuilding of Guatemala. 

Enrique Serrano, the UN’s interim leader, won the presidency in 1978 and pledged closer ties with both the United States, Mexico, and China. In 1979, Guatemala would join the World Prosperity Organization and over the next couple of years China would help design and build several industrial megafactories, mainly concentrated around the northern autonomous zone of Quiche. 

In 1984, the new president, Luis Arana, started to force ethnic minorities to work in factories, much like how China was doing with their minorities. This caused ethnic tension to build up, but for most of the country, they are fine with it as it means dirt cheap goods and a skyrocketing economy. Guatemala sent convicts to help rebuild Mexico City after the earthquake of 1985, and resulted in a very close relationship between the two countries. 

Like many countries, it all came crashing down in the aftermath of the last Sinai War of 1988. Many companies in both the USA and Mexico were reluctant to do trade with Guatemala, and despite neither country officially tariffing Guatemala until the 90s, things got bad very fast. The USSR reimplemented the Brezhnev policy and Cuba began supplying the rebels once again. Guatemala entered another civil war, though there were some who said that it was just the second chapter of the original war from the 1960s. 

In 1989, President Arana was forced to declare martial law after mass civil unrest, as a result of food shortages, energy shortages and unemployment causing enormous demonstrations in major cities around the country, destabilizing the few businesses still functioning. 

In Guatemala, the Hot Summer of 1990 was called so as not just the environment went hot, but the civil war as well. Cuban-supplied rebels bombed factories across the nation, crippling the economy and sending so much smoke into the air that for two weeks in June, smoke covered the skies of much of Central America. Rationing was implemented, and all the chaos was blamed on Mayan rebels and their Belizean sympathizers. 

With the UK clearly dealing with their own problems, President Arana, who was now President-for-Life after an emergency law was passed, decided to invade Belize. Using wartime conditions, he was allowed to exert even more control over his citizens. Unsurprisingly though, this caused the rebel numbers to swell as many believed that he was nothing more than a dictator at this point. The wealth that their compliance had won them had dried up, and now everyone was poor and suffering together. 

As the civil war escalated, the government forces were kicked out of Guatemala City on February 7, 1992 by the rebel army, now called the Popular Front of Guatemala. Guatemala essentially was split in two: the north was a crumbling industrial society loyal to the government, and in the south, was an agrarian ethnostate that regularly executed European hispanics. After it became clear that the Popular Front of Guatemala was operating purely on ethnic lines and not trying to create socialism in their country, support from Cuba and the USSR dried up. 

Both sides of Guatemala fractured during the 90s, with the northern forces splintering into several industrial city states, and the southern forces turning into ethnically based anarchic communes. President Arana was killed by one of his generals in 1993, and after that the only thing that united the north was their hatred for the south. Conversely, the myriad of communes were only united in their hatred for those who had tried to work them to death in the 1980s. 

By the late 90s, things had stabilized into an uneasy peace as climate change, drought and famine were becoming more pressing concerns rather than unifying the country under one flag. The coasts were regularly flooded, and in the north, several industrial accidents caused wildfires to burn out entire forests and crop fields. 

When China arrived in the 21st Century, they propped up the struggling remnants of the central government in the north, and retooled their factories to dramatically increase their yield (and carbon emissions). The General of Flores used their new industrial might to conquer the rest of the squabbling north and united them against the “communists of the South”. 

China was the only thing keeping the north alive, and even then, it was on life support. Skirmishes into the south resulted in slaves, material, and food, and all China asked for in return was a portion of their precious metals. When China left in 2007, the north’s power vanished once again and the country collapsed into yet another stage of civil war. 

By 2010, fighting had gotten so brutal that many considered Guatemala a failed state. The General of Flores was deposed in 2008, and after that, many in the south waged war on who they viewed as “collaborators”. By 2015, the region that was once known as Guatemala was now ruled by several dozen feudal warlords, who waged war on each other and the cartels that were dominating Central America. 

As a result of the Great Heatwave of 2015, several Mexican cartels took over the ruined factories of the north and repurposed them to produce weapons for their own conflicts. Using Bromista, the various cartels subjugated and enslaved much of the population and used them to grow plants in greenhouses. In the 2020s, the largest cartel south of Mexico City, the Jinete de la Plaga Cartel, or Plague Rider Cartel, gradually took over Guatemala. 

By 2027, Guatemala is a storm-ravaged wasteland, its population blissfully addicted to the Siesta of Bromista. 

Belize

Official name: Belize
Capital: Belize City (Until 2005)
Government Type: Constitutional monarchy (1981-1991), Far-Left Military Junta (1992-2005)
Population as of final census conducted: 1,821,020 (Circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 690,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $418 Million USD
Primary Language: Belizean Creole (Belize Kriol)
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: None 
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Belize became fully independent of the UK in 1981. Unlike other areas of the world, Belize was not lifted up to a short but sweet utopian vision during the Glorious Decades. In fact, in 1988, Belize was considered one of the poorest nations in the world. The government of Belize tried to reinvigorate the economy by letting in foreign investment, but this only resulted in exploitation and further poverty. Many of Belize’s natural resources were exploited in such a way that the environmental damage was evident as early as 1982, when the Belize Barrier Reef reported record bleaching. 

After the Crash of 1988, not much changed in Belize, as poverty had already united the country. Cuba began to send aid to Belize in exchange for promises of their government becoming leftist, which many in power agreed to. Ties with the West were already dead before the 80s, and those in Washington and London would not help a small third world country in Latin America. 

Belize began to stabilize in the early Red Decades, as their incredibly small population made it easier for them to allocate land and food. With the help of Cuba, Belize barely weathered the Hot Summer and even began to set up collectivized farms. 

However, this attracted the attention of their neighbors in Guatemala. President Arana invaded Belize, citing the Cuban military bases there as a threat to their national security, and soon much of Belize was fighting for their own survival. To help with the war effort, and at the advice of Cuban fighters, Belize’s government was reformed into a far-left military junta. With the aid of Cuban guerillas and using their home turf advantage, Belize soon turned the war into a stalemate, much to Guatemala’s chagrin. 

In 1992, after the rebels in the Guatemalan Civil War took Guatemala City, the government forces retreated to the north and became even closer to Belize. Skirmishes intensified across the border, and Belize became more and more reliant on Cuba due to the wildfires and storms affecting their food supply. 

By 1993, the joint forces of Belize and Cuba had kicked Guatemala out of Belize, but much of the country was left in ruins. Belize City was devastated by constant bombings, and entire rural towns had been burned to the ground. It was here that Cuba gave their allies the unfortunate news that they would no longer be supplying Belize, or any country in Latin America, from now on. Not even a week after their victory against the Guatemalan invaders did Cuba fully evacuate Belize, taking all their equipment but leaving their military bases intact and unmanned. 

Belize’s miniscule government, overstretched and now scarcely able to man their own borders, struggled to keep law and order without the help of Cuban volunteers. Throughout the 90s, the Belize Junta lost more and more territory to anarchy until they controlled only Belize City and a few farms outside of it. In the weather-ravaged countryside, reports of gangs of bandits and cartels began to dominate the gossip of Belize City. 

Belize’s military government attempted to hold on to as many Cuban outposts as they could, but one by one, they were either willingly abandoned by the soldiers due to supply shortages, or taken over by groups of starving but organized bandits. By 2000, Belize had essentially regressed into a feudal society, with the junta in Belize City simply being the largest. Belize was already so far gone that China didn’t think it was worth it to attempt to industrialize them. 

Flooding became the largest problem in Belize. While their population was small enough that famine wasn’t a problem during the 90s, as floods constantly disrupted farms and destroyed crops, soon the supplies that remained had to be rationed. The floods also caused extensive damage to housing and buildings, leading to weakened foundations that were easily crippled by strong winds. In 2004, the government attempted to build a flood wall around Belize City, however constant rains slowed progress until it stopped entirely. 

In 2005, during a massive rainstorm that lasted weeks, the Belize Junta attempted to escape the city in a series of boats. They tried to sail to Cuba, but were caught in a storm and their ship capsized in the Caribbean. What little order was left was swept away with the water, and the one million inhabitants of Belize City struggled to survive as it fell to anarchy. 

Soon the people of Belize were facing another invasion: the Mexican People’s Army, who had invaded for “peacekeeping” purposes and pacified the rampant cartel rings in the countryside. At first, many actually joined the Mexicans, as they considered them to be the lesser evil compared to the Guatemalans or the numerous cartels. But the soldiers the MPA sent were untrained and incompetent, and for each victory they won against the cartels, they lost another five, not to mention all the innocent Belizeans caught in the crossfire. 

After eight long years and countless setbacks, the MPA finally pulled out of Belize, leaving it to the mercy of the cartels. They soon divided up the remaining communities and used them to grow food and drugs, keeping them blissfully unaware of the deteriorating world. In 2021, the Plague Rider Cartel from Guatemala invaded Belize, conquering it from the two remaining cartels. 

By 2027, Belize is completely abandoned as intense storms and biblical flooding prevent any long-term settlements or for greenhouses to last long enough for their crop to fully grow. The last cartel operation, located in Spanish Lookout, was abandoned in 2026 after a rival cartel poisoned their water supply. 

Honduras

Official name: Republic of Honduras
Capital: Tegucigalpa
Government Type: Presidential Republic (1979-1993), Far-Right Military Junta (1993-2000)
Population as of final census conducted: 18,903,743 (Circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 2,400,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $6.877 Billion USD
Primary Language: Honduran Spanish (Español hondureño)
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (Until 1992)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

In the 1970s, Honduras saw the record economic growth that many nations saw during the Glorious Decades. In 1979, the military peacefully transferred power to a civilian government, which worked closely with the United Nations Anti-Drug Task Force. 

The Anti-Drug Task Force was J. Edgar Hoover’s brainchild, being formed in 1973 to combat the rampant subversive drug use around the world. More importantly, it gave the powers that be an excuse to routinely raid and pillage those that they did not like: totally-not-planted evidence was always found on hippies, protesters and feminists. The Anti-Drug Task Force was also used for legitimate operations, mainly in South America, to combat the excess amounts of illegal chemicals in those areas. Marijuana, cocaine, heroin, and LSD were seized by the truckload, and governments that cooperated were rewarded. 

Honduras was the Anti-Drug Task Force’s main ally in Latin America, hosting a base in La Ceiba that contained holding cells, a forensics lab, and barracks for the militaries of the myriad of countries that were members of the Task Force. Honduras’s main goal for working so closely with the UN was not to tackle the drug problem, of course, but to deal with the Marxist insurgents that plagued the countryside. Throughout the 70s, the military government gave exaggerated stories about “drugged out hyper-Maoists getting their children addicted to weed and communism”, and the USA, trying to keep their military-industrial complex afloat, sent over military surplus from Vietnam. 

After Secretary Agassi resigned and the Soviet Union briefly became more liberal, as a token of good faith and that they were dedicated to working with the West, Minister Petrov sent several diplomats to negotiate with the Marxist insurgents. By 1984, the insurgency had surrendered and signed a peace treaty with the government, and negotiations were started to reintegrate the insurgents back into the capitalist, neoliberal Honduras. 

The Anti-Drug Task Force, and Honduras’s role in it, made them very dependent on trade with the USA and Mexico, and to a lesser extent, China and the USSR. Honduras joined the Alliance of Industrial Nations, the USA’s trading bloc, and was a large exporter of coffee and bananas. China was a major importer of their agricultural products, with their coffee supplying Chen’s megafactories. 

On March 1st, 1988, Operation: Silver Turkey was conducted by the United Nations Anti-Drug Task Force, led by United States Marines and Honduran commandos. The target of the operation was the Cinco Caballos Cartel, notorious for smuggling potent LSD throughout Latin America. The operation was for the most part mostly successful, with only three casualties (one Chinese operative and two Honduran commandos) throughout early 1988. The Task Force was closing in on the Cartel headquarters outside of Cruta when suddenly, the coalition was put on standby. The various participating countries covertly recalled their troops, citing national security concerns. 

Operation: Silver Turkey would never be completed, as on June 8th, 1988, the planned date of the raid on Cruta, Iran would launch their nuclear weapons, ending the last Sinai War and the Glorious Decades. Later that summer, as Cuba and the Soviet Union began to aid the fledgling leftist government around the world, the Marxist insurgency in Honduras saw a massive revival in the incomprehensible poverty that followed. 

The Marxists did not win the election of 1989, but the leftist government of the Liberal Party of Honduras barely won over the conservative National Party. Rather than acknowledging the Eternal Depression, the Liberal government instead blamed the state of the country on the rampant drug use and far-left communism that Cuba was spreading. In an attempt to rally the population, and make use of the large number of unemployed, the government implemented a sweeping draft and then launched a phoney war with El Salvador, blaming them for just about everything under the sun and performing huge military exercises along their border. 

During the Hot Summer of 1990, Honduras’s government was forced to implement widespread rationing due to resource shortages. Despite El Salvador, Cuba, and the USSR being blamed for somehow sabotaging the environment, the underground Marxist faction began to see a record amount of sympathy from Honduran citizens. This would lead to the government banning the Marxist faction in fall of 1990, and then martial law was declared in 1991. Freedom of assembly was suspended, along with freedom of the press. As Honduras slipped into being a police state, corruption and incompetence led to widespread famine by 1992. The last environmental laws were repealed and their national reserves were turned into gargantuan superfarms. 

Finally, on June 6th, 1993, Honduras invaded El Salvador. The invasion was spectacularly bloody and mismanaged, with a morbidly impressive amount of casualties being a result of friendly fire and supply line failures. In spite of Honduran propaganda portraying El Salvador as a backwards, communist country, the invasion was such a monumental military defeat that the government of Honduras collapsed into its own civil war in July that year. President Nasralla was executed by an angry general, and soon the military took control of the Honduran government. 

This led to widespread protests around the country, and various departments declaring independence from the capital. The Marxists, who Cuba had been secretly training, launched a full scale guerrilla war against the numerous right-wing governments and military dictators. The war raged on, with just about every city changing hands at least once, and in the chaos organized crime, gangs, and cartels flourished. Smuggling operations dominated the coast, and a black market emerged along the border with Guatemala. 

By 2000, the civil war had fizzled out into a protracted stalemate, with just a handful of city-states being controlled by various flavors of Marxist and Fascist dictators. Almost half of the cities had been destroyed in the fighting or from extreme storms. In the countryside, bandits roamed the no-man’s land in between the cities and routinely raided farms. Numerous attempts were led by both sides of the political spectrum to reunite Honduras, but they were routinely wiped out by the Cinco Caballos, who found their operations to be much easier with the communists and fascists fighting each other. 

That was, until in 2006, the Mexican People’s Army invaded Honduras. At first, they claimed to be on the side of the Marxists, and were spreading Mexican Socialism to the impoverished Hondurans. They also brought with them Valdez’s fanatical hatred for the Cartels, and with the help of the Confederacy of Western Honduran Communes, drove the cartel operations into the eastern side of the country. This resulted in the Cinco Caballos taking over the leadership of the fragmented far-right city states, and used leftover military equipment to wage war on the Mexicans and Marxists. 

In actuality, though, the Marxists had devolved into feudal warlords, and the Mexicans were merely their new lords. The Mexicans milked Honduras of all that it was worth, keeping their collaborators barely alive, and when it was clear that it was no longer worth the effort, they abandoned their holdings in Honduras. One particularly bad week-long rainstorm and a military defeat outside of Yoro caused the Mexicans to pull out of Honduras, and the few Marxist warlords left were easily defeated by the drug-fueled war machine of the Cinco Caballos. 

Soon, the Cinco Caballos controlled all of Honduras, and slowly worked at turning the entire country into one massive growing operation for the cartel. LSD was primarily produced, but the strain used caused numerous side effects such as severe psychosis and bouts of mania. Drug-fueled uprisings happened monthly, with the cartel guards using lethal force to routinely quell the disruption. 

In 2014, refugees fleeing from the Cuban Civil War attempted to stage a revolution against the Cinco Caballos, and for a few months, cartel slaves awoke and fought back. Eventually, they were beaten back down and forced back into their drug-induced stupor. 

The Great Heatwaves of 2015 upset the balance of power across the world, and in Honduras, this came in the form of the Guatemalan Plague Rider Cartel waging war on the Cinco Caballos. The Cinco Caballos were wiped out by 2017, with much of the cartel leadership defecting to the Plague Riders. Peace was short lived as in 2018 the Plague Riders began to experience incursions from the Mexican Black Rose Cartel, and by 2022 Honduras was essentially under Mexican control. 

Over the next five years, the country was thoroughly depopulated, and those that remained were worked to death in intensive farms growing luxury crops for cartel leadership, like coffee beans and scrawny, disease-ridden bananas. 

By 2027, Honduras is a heavily-fortified wasteland under control of the Black Rose Cartel. 
El Salvador

Official name: Republic of El Salvador
Capital: San Salvador
Government Type: Far-Right Military Dictatorship (1961-1995), Far-Left Military Junta (1995-2000)
Population as of final census conducted: 12,130,087 (Circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 100,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.771 Billion USD
Primary Language: Salvadoran Spanish (Español salvadoreño)
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (Until 1995)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

In the Glorious Decades, El Salvador narrowly avoided a civil war. The military dictatorship, using the economic splendor of the 70s and 80s, managed to keep a hold on their legitimacy. Crackdowns and raids, along with Anti-Drug Task Force operations, kept a tight hold on the population. For the average Salvadoran, they put up with the militarized government and the constant raids, as unless you were in the government’s crosshair, one could live an opulent life. 

That all changed, of course, after the Crash of 1988. No longer did the people stand by and watch as the government pushed everyone around. Mass protests erupted across the nation, and in 1989, a few members of the military launched a coup and did away with the sham of democracy that the PCN touted, instead deciding to rule directly. Things remained chaotic at best, however, and after the Hot Summer of 1990, civil war broke out between various left-leaning factions and far-right despots. 

Due to El Salvador’s small size, the fighting was brutal and intense. Entire departments were made uninhabitable due to industrial sabotage and scorched earth tactics, and Cuban supplies kept the leftist guerrillas operating. The fighting dragged on for three years, until in 1993, Honduras invaded El Salvador. Despite their differences, the two factions of the PCN and the FMLN made a truce and united to repel their northern invaders. 

The joint operations helped build trust between the two factions, and after Honduras was kicked out, a formal treaty between the two was signed and they began to start talks about jointly running the government. Neither side fully trusted the other, however, and on September 15th, 1995, the FMLN broke the armistice and took San Salvador by storm. The FMLN hoped that such a show of force would result in Cuba sending support once again, unaware that Cuba was facing their own problems. 

From 1995-2000, the FMLN Coalition ruled El Salvador, and while the average El Salvadoran was just grateful that the fighting had stopped and they could focus on rebuilding, they quickly lost faith in the FMLN as they proved to be exceptionally corrupt and prone to infighting. Storms and floods routinely devastated any attempts at rebuilding, and almost a million died in the famine in 1999. The FMLN began organizing witch hunts to find the remnants of the far-right junta, promising to “eat the rich”. In some cases, this was taken quite literally, as captured politicians from the Glorious Decades were roasted alive on a spit and then carved up to eat for the starving masses. Those that ate swore loyalty to the FMLN, first out of hunger, and then out of extreme guilt at what they had done. 

There were some, of course, who were absolutely appalled by the insanity happening around them, and talked about how communism had failed them. They didn’t need to eat politicians during the 70s and 80s, afterall, so a small but vocal minority advocated a return to an over industrialized system once again. 

The Civil War started up yet again in late 2000, when a dirty bomb exploded in San Salvador and caused radiation to leak across most of El Salvador, permanently tainting the soil for centuries. The remnants of the PCN fought tooth and nail against the FMLN, with organized crime and anarchy creeping in from the edges of the battlefield. 

For ten long years they fought, and there was no victor. By 2011, El Salvador had become a hellish wasteland, completely incapable of supporting any life, not just human. Industrial runoff and chemical rain had tainted the land not corrupted by the radiation, and in the few places possible of supporting life, apocalyptic storms and flooding destroyed any attempt of agriculture. Forest fires burned out the last husks of vegetation, leaving El Salvador a charred, desolate landscape filled with craters and shriveled, burned out foundations. 99% of the population fled, becoming members of the various leftist factions around Latin America or being sold into slavery by cartels. The few that remained kept to themselves, isolated in fortified bunkers and exploring the ruins by night. In the 2020s, parts of the habitable north were absorbed by Honduras, leaving the rest of what was once El Salvador to their own devices. 

By 2027, El Salvador has been forgotten by almost everyone, now lost to the annals of history. 
Nicaragua

Official name: Republic of Nicaragua/República de Nicaragua, People’s Republic of Nicaragua/República Popular de Nicaragua (disputed)
Capital: Managua
Government Type: Presidential Republic (1976-1989), Far-Left Military Junta (1989-1994)
Population as of final census conducted: 11,712,765 (Circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 4,600,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $1.499 Billion USD
Primary Language: Nicaraguan Spanish (Español nicaragüense)
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (Until 1989), COMECON (1989-1994)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Nicaragua's history picks up after the earthquake in 1972. After having signed the Shanghai Accords earlier that year, both the United States and China pledged help in rebuilding Nicaragua - after all, that could be a lucrative market. As part of the negotiations with Somoza, Nircugua was forced to open in exchange for international aid. 

This period of reform rapidly got out of the government’s control, and soon, Somoza was deposed in a peaceful revolution in late 1973. Working with the United States and China, Nicaragua was transformed into a neoliberal democracy with heavy investments from other industrial nations. The first free elections were held in 1976, and the right-leaning PCD established a foothold in the politics of the country. Throughout the rest of the 70s, Cuba attempted, against the Soviet Union’s change in policy, to inspire the downtrodden and rise up against their government. Unfortunately, they were too content with the current system and by 1978, Cuba had fully given up. This was the final straw for Castro, and throughout the 80s, he isolated Cuba from the rest of the world, only opening up communication when Ivan Voronin became Minister of Defense. 

Throughout the rest of the 1980s, Nicaragua became the largest exporter of coffee in the world, beating Honduras by a wide margin. The fact that Nicaragua used convict labor to grow the coffee in the rapidly increasing humidity is a fact many simply ignored, and so more and more coffee was made. Nashville House, the largest coffee company in the United States and Europe, had lucrative deals with the Nicaraguan government that resulted in corporate enclaves that were one step removed from being a company town. It was a well known fact that the new government would do anything to make a quick buck, especially at their citizen’s expense: factories were built in the middle of cities, industrial run off mixed in with irrigation water, and droughts were only met with snappy remarks and a policy that basically boiled down to “shut up and work anyway”. 

It was then no surprise that after the Crash of 1988, the government rapidly began to destabilize and collapse in on itself. Protests, prison breaks and cartels hiding out from the UN all contributed to the central government collapsing in early 1989 as Marxist rebels, supported by Cuba, raised the flag of the FSLN in Managua. That did not put a stop to the fighting, however, and the corruption only increased. A few countries tried to hold peace talks, though once it became clear that the country would be far too chaotic to grow coffee in, most of the world left Nicaragua to their fate. 

Spillover from the rampant civil war led to Nicaragua invading the comparatively wealthier Costa Rica in 1990, and with it, Cuba withdrew their support. The war dragged on for three years, and despite Costa Rica being a vastly smaller nation, they managed to win due to the constant infighting and mismanaged war effort. It was said that Nicaragua had a new head of state every season, and switched between right-wing and left-wing governments several times. 

After a particularly bad famine in 1993, with rumors of cannibalism in the fringes of the country, all central order collapsed and Nicaragua became a loose alliance of fragmented city-states. Soon the tides would turn, as in the mid 1990s Nicruagua was plagued with Costa Rican refugees fleeing the Colombian armies. What little order remained vanished and Nicaragua fell to anarchy. The rest of the 1990s in Nicaragua could be compared to feudal Europe. 

In 2001, Costa Rican cartels, namely the Agua Roja Cartel, expanded their operations into the no-man’s land that was once Nicaragua. The Agua Roja were unique in that they didn’t use drugs to control their serfs, but used excessive and brutal force instead. Throughout the early to mid 2000s, Nicaragua was pacified and put to heel under the Agua Roja, until the Great Storm of 2008, where a combination of flooding, storms, and rebellion forced the Agua Roja to completely flee Costa Rica and base themselves entirely out of Nicaragua. No longer did the Agua Roja engage in just drug growing operations, but intensive agriculture as well. 

From 2009-2011, Mexican Marxists, chasing the remnants of the various cartels in Central America, arrived in occupied Nicaragua and battled them for control. At this point, Valdez’s men were fighting just for the sake of fighting, viewing the cartels as subhuman degenerates who needed to be exterminated so that Mexican Socialism could finally be realized. The cartels were vastly better equipped, and more importantly, organized, and so by 2012 the Mexicans were kicked out. 

The various cartels worked together only because they shared a common enemy, and once Valdez left, they were at each other’s throats. The Agua Roja were wiped out in 2014, and in the Great Heatwave of 2015, many of the numerous smaller cartels died out. For the serfs, some of them briefly tried to make a stand and create their own city states, but their relief was short lived as in 2016 the Black Rose invaded them to set up gargantuan Bromista growing operations. 

As the environment got worse and worse, with cataclysmic storms, heatwaves and floods destroying Latin America, the Black Rose invested heavily in their growing operations in Nicaragua. Extreme UV radiation forced all their greenhouses to operate at night, and throughout the 2020s, various uprisings were launched against the cartels. Each one was put down with more force than the last, until in 2024, when the Black Rose began a policy of lobotomizing suspected agitators. 

As of 2027, Nicaragua is still under control of the Black Rose, but just barely. 
Costa Rica

Official name: Republic of Costa Rica/República de Costa Rica
Capital: San José
Government Type: Presidential Republic (1953-1989), Authoritarian Dictatorship (1989-1995)
Population as of final census conducted: 10,410,736 (Circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 1,200,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $4.636 Billion USD
Primary Language: Costa Rican Spanish (Español costarricense)
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (Until 1988)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

In the Glorious Decades, Costa Rica became the wealthiest country in Latin America. Carazo never became President, and thus Costa Rica maintained good relations with both the United States and the IMF. Yet despite the record economic growth and surging tourism, the President of Costa Rica, José Solís Arias, knew that it was only temporary, and something would bring it all crashing down. 

He proved to be right, although the circumstances were different to what he had expected: he believed a nuclear war between China and the USSR would bring about the end of civilization, yet it was a nuclear war all the same that caused everything to collapse. Immediately after the Crash of 1988, as early as June 8th, 1988, President Arias slowly severed ties with much of the world. He ordered the various industrial sites around the country to begin producing essential goods rather than consumer products. Costa Rica was supposedly one of the first countries to implement rationing, all the way back in July of 1988. This led to widespread protests, and after lethal force was used, disruption died down. In August of 1988, using a vague idea of nationalism and purity, President Arias used the military to sweep the country for foreign nationals, rounded them up, and deported them to their home countries. In situations where the national’s country did not exist, such as Iraq or Saudi Arabia, they were given a new identity and an offer to join the military of Costa Rica, or to leave and head to Europe[2]. Very few took the offer to stay in Costa Rica, as after the Media Blackout after June 8th, 1988, many believed that Europe was in a better state. 

In 1989, when it became clear that President Arias was one of the few heads of state in Latin America who was thinking for his people and not out of greed for a bygone era, he submitted a law to the Legislative Assembly making his presidential terms unlimited as long as poverty, homelessness and unemployment was above a certain percentage, in effect making him president for life. Whenever someone challenged him about his growing authoritarianism, and there were many, he would always show them the mighty asterisk in the clause and remind them that it was only temporary. 

In 1989 and 1990, Costa Rica barely hung on. Many social services were created, like government housing, community gardens, and strict water limits. Anyone who protested, either at the enormous overreach of the government or about their once glamorous life now reduced to one of rationing and heatwaves, were met with the full force of the Costa Rican military. The Hot Summer of 1990 almost crippled Costa Rica, but the early rationing of water helped the population cope with the changes. 

On September 1st, 1990, a group of Nicaraguan rebels crossed into La Cruz. They were chased by pro-government forces and took several Costa Rican workers as hostages. This enraged President Arias, who had severed diplomatic ties with countries solely to prevent a situation such as this. He sent in a platoon of Special Intervention Units with one goal: retake La Cruz by any means necessary. The SIU did not have to wait long, as by the time they got to La Cruz, the pro-government forces had already begun shooting the communist rebels, and the SIU simply mopped up the survivors. The pro-government forces had the decency to minimize casualties: only one Costa Rican was killed in the crossfire. 

For propaganda purposes, the one dead Costa Rican, Francisco Juan Calderon, was turned into a martyr, with an abstract minimalist monument erected in his name in La Cruz. Enlistment with the Costa Rican military skyrocketed, and Costa Rica managed to retake their occupied land with surprisingly low casualties. Nicaragua ended up being a rather easy opponent, as they were too busy fighting themselves than Costa Rica. Still, border skirmishes became such a common occurrence that Costa Rica built several fortified military bases along their northern border, and were in the process of building a border wall when the war ended and both Nicuraguas sued for peace 

In 1994, Costa Rica began the slow process of rebuilding their infrastructure. President Arias focused on building factories and production sites in between their northern border and San José, but this would prove to be a fatal mistake, as their entire eastern border was left undefended. President Arias was so focused on the Nicurgaans to the north that he was completely blindsided by Gran Colombia invading through Panama, trying to expand their territory. 

Over the next three years, Costa Rica desperately tried to defend their sovereignty. President Arias was presumed dead after San José was practically leveled, and organized resistance was slowly whittled down to just hit-and-run guerilla warfare. When the occupation forces stopped showing up in force, and were reduced to only a skeleton crew to oversee the country, the underground resistance hoped that this would be the end of their war and they could take back the country. La Sombra del Istmo, or the Isthmus Syndicate, was a powerful cartel that controlled much of Panama’s underground and once Colombia was distracted by Brazil’s war, they took over Panama and expanded into Costa Rica, battling the Agua Roja for control. 

Costa Rica was exhausted from fighting two wars of survival in just seven years, and many in the resistance deserted. A few of the most hardcore, dedicated men remained; they attempted to disrupt the cartel takeover of Costa Rica but many had given up, soon to be addicted to a myriad of drugs to keep them docile. 

Much of Costa Rica’s wealth was left intact outside of San José, and so throughout the 2000s the cartel leadership sold Costa Ricans as slaves to other cartels. As the country became less and less populated, lavish cities were built and the Agua Roja moved in. These walled enclaves were echoes of the luxury flats in New York City, with air-conditioning, running water, and other luxuries from the Glorious Decades. 

The Costa Rican resistance remained, if smaller than ever, and in 2008 they launched an organized rebellion against the Syndicate and Agua Roja. Millions of servants rose up and fought tooth and nail against those that have humiliated them for a decade, and in the process, many estates were burnt to the ground. Things weren’t going good for Panama either, and millions of refugees fled into Costa Rica, overwhelming the already distracted Syndicate. 

Order collapsed and for the next ten years, Costa Rica fell into total anarchy, with dozens of statelets forming only to fall a few months later. The Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016 resulted in mass drought and millions of casualties, but the fighting continued. The Warlord of Nuevo Arenal waged war with the Captain of Limon, not to mention the 20 or so cartels that tried to take over land to recoup their losses after the heat waves. 

Every year, the heat got worse, and the storms got stronger, and by the 2020s storms became so big that they ripped entire towns out of the ground. Black Rose attempted to pacify Costa Rica and establish growing operations there, but the Second Great Heatwave of 2023 forced them to pull out. 

By 2027, Costa Rica is in anarchy, controlled by no warlord, cartel, army or government. 

[1] The Mexican-American Pipeline ended in Texas. King-Chevron, the owners of the American side, claimed to have fixed their end of the pipeline. King-Chevron would be investigated by the Graves Administration later that term and be found guilty of aiding the Mexican rebels in an attempt to provoke a war with Mexico, though those details were never released to the public. 
[2] At first, in the very early months after the Sinai War, Europe initially opened up their borders to stateless refugees. 

Section 2: South America
Panama

Official name: Mandate of Panama/Mandato de Panamá (1987-1989), People’s Republic of Panama/República Popular de Panamá (1989-1995)
Capital: Panama City
Government Type: United Nations Protectorate (1987-1989), Far Left Military Junta (1989-1995)
Population as of final census conducted: 8,175,891 (Circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 60,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $5.441 Billion USD
Primary Language: Panamanian Spanish/Español Panameño
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (Until 1987), COMECON (1989-1994)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

After the signing of the Shanghai Accords, both the United States and China looked to the increasingly unstable military government in Panama and declared them a threat to free trade. This resulted in an unprecedented United Nations mission, led by a joint coalition of the United States and China, that deposed Torrijos and made the Panama Canal a neutral zone run by the United Nations. This new Panama was a puppet state rife with corruption, as smugglers and pirates now flocked to the now open canal. As a result, the United Nations Peacekeeping Mission in Panama regularly engaged with small-time smugglers and pirates, and in the 1980s, cartels. The world turned a blind eye to the obscene levels of corruption and crime in Panama: as long as the nations of the world got their sweet, cheap goods, everyone was happy. 

Panama began to see a staggering level of income inequality during the 1980s, as the workers in the Panama Canal Neutral Zone became millionaires while just about everyone else struggled to make ends meet, with many turning to crime and forcing the State Police (what the military of Panama became after the joint invasion) to gradually escalate their brutality. 

In early 1987, things had gotten so bad that the State Police, using confiscated black market weapons, staged an uprising against the UN Panama Mission, and attempted to take back the canal. They were met with extreme and swift retribution, as countries could not afford even a momentary lapse in the flow of goods. By summer of 1987, all of Panama had been turned into a United Nations Protectorate, known as the Mandate of Panama. The State Police were thoroughly demilitarized and UN Peacekeepers took over just about every aspect of the government to keep trade flowing smoothly. 

That was the status quo until the last Sinai War caused fears of a third world war to break out. Many countries recalled their troops, and soon Panama was left to their own devices again. Anarchy followed, but on January 16th, 1989, Jovano Mendoza Vila, former State Commissioner of Panama City, reunited all of Panama’s former territory, including the canal. Traffic through the canal had fallen by over 1,594% by the time he had regained control of the country, and strangely, Commissioner Vila found it reassuring. He viewed it unlikely that any country would come by to control them again. 

Commissioner Vila, having long watched the poverty of his country force men into lives of crime, decided to create a series of social programs to help curb criminal activity. These were successful, though expensive. His government was forced to turn to heavily taxing the few ships passing through the canal, and then robbing them of a portion of their supplies. When that dried up, Commissioner Vila made a deal with the devil and allowed Colombian cartels to move their supplies through Panama, in exchange for food. The People’s Republic of Panama had no shortage of expensive and intricate weaponry, as the UN’s contraband vaults were never emptied when they left, but they lacked many other necessary things to help rebuild their country. Vila even joined COMECON and began to ally their nation with the USSR, which was the only major power who did not relentlessly bully Panama in the Glorious Decades. 

After Commissioner Vila was assassinated in 1990 by a greedy cartel member, the new military government of Panama gradually became just as corrupt as the US-China led puppet state. With the average Panamanian still not seeing a notable increase to their quality of life, unrest began to form, eventually spiraling into a civil war in 1994 between angry partisans and corrupt military officials. 

The war continued for some time, as while the military was significantly better equipped than the partisan rebels, the rebels were many and had nothing left to lose, having lived in poverty for so long. It was in the summer of 1994. The country was split roughly evenly, with the partisans on the western side and the cartel-backed military on the eastern side, and abruptly the Colombian Army swarmed Panama and took the canal. 

Colombia initially claimed to be on a mission to stamp-out cartel activity, which many in Panama agreed with, at first. Colombia proved to be just as cruel as a master as the military had been though, and the rebellion picked up again. Panamanian guerrillas made keeping the canal as hard as they could for Colombia, and in 1997, they got their wish. Colombia pulled out of Panama when the increasingly imperialistic Brazil began a campaign to take Bogota. 

This was where La Sombra del Istmo saw their chance and took over the Canal, becoming Panama’s final masters. The guerillas were exhausted and demoralized, and all holdouts were wiped out by 2000. Panama became just as corrupt as it was during the Glorious Decades, if significantly poorer. The Panama Syndicate used the canal to ferry drugs, slaves, and weapons to their clients in South America and Central America, as well as raiding abandoned islands in the Caribbean. The Panamanian Syndicate became known for trafficking “tango calves”, a euphemism for women sold into sex slavery, kept placid by Bromista. 

In August 2008, a massive tropical storm drenched Panama in a month of torrential floods and heavy rains. An uprising was launched, and the Cartel was driven out of Panama and west into Costa Rica. The storm destroyed much of the structures in Panama, including permanently damaging the canal beyond repair, and led to anarchy and warlordism in the areas that remained. 

Throughout the 2010s, the Isthmus Wasteland was occasionally picked over by various cartels, pirates, scavengers, and refugees fleeing from the chaos in Brazil. As the years dragged on and the environment crumbled, these new tourists stopped visiting, and in the 2020s the UV radiation got so bad that it was a death sentence to go outside during the day. The Solar Storm of 2026 caused the last palm trees to light on fire. 

By 2027, Panama is a wind-ravaged wasteland, ruled over by a scarce few warlords in tiny enclaves. 
Colombia

Official name: Republic of Colombia/República de Colombia (until 1989), Gran Colombia (1989-2000), Brazilian Governorship of Colombia and Panama/Governança brasileira da Colômbia e do Panamá (2000-2013)
Capital: Bogota
Government Type: Presidential Republic (until 1989), Far Right Authoritarian State (1989-2000), Military Occupation (2000-2013)
Population as of final census conducted: 104,706,063 (Circa 2010)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 71,900,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $43.372 Billion USD
Primary Language: Colombian Spanish/Española Colombiana
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (until 1989)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

In Colombia during the Glorious Decades, the widespread reforms throughout China and the USSR caused many left-wing guerilla movements to lose hope and surrender to the government. Of the many groups that surrendered, only a few managed to actually be granted clemency. With the covert help of the United States, many of these groups were wiped out by the 1980s. 

Part of these clandestine operations included the assassination of prominent members of the April 19th Movement, a group that believed that the elections in 1970 were rigged and that Gustavo Rojas Pinilla rightfully won the presidency. The M-19 movement was the only leftist organization to continue to operate in Colombia during the Glorious Decades, and as such, special care was taken to ensure that it was to be wiped out. The United States, working with the right-wing government of Colombia, used the United Nations Anti-Drug Task Force as a cover to engage in their purges. 

Ironically, it turned out the Colombian underbelly was home to one of the largest drug running operations in history, and soon the United Nations created an international coalition to combat the rising criminal activity, the US and Colombia still worked on eradicating guerillas on the side. While many small-time gangs continued to risk capture to make extremely lucrative deals, the larger, more organized members tried to stay under the radar. This did not always work in their favor, as increasingly intricate drug busts were conducted throughout the 1980s, finally culminating in the death of Pablo Escobar during a joint USA-USSR-PRC raid on June 11th, 1986. This dealt a massive blow to the criminal underground, and for the next two years, crime dropped to levels unseen for decades. 

Colombia’s recovery stagnated after the Crash of 1988, and the right-wing government tried to continue business as normal, believing that the crisis was temporary - they’d both wiped out the drug lords, and they had wiped out their opposition. It was then to their complete surprise when a group of far-right paramilitaries started to vocally claim that the government wasn’t doing enough, and on February 6th, 1989, this resulted in the RNC, or the National Restoration of Colombia, to take over the government in a military coup. 

This new group was extremely fascist and nationalistic, and began to reorganize the country on “ideals of Colombian glory”. The Hot Summer of 1990 was not that devastating to Colombia (which now called itself Gran Colombia, despite still controlling the same territory as it did pre-1989) as protests were nipped in the bud with lethal force before they ever got out of hand. The government then blamed the protesters, claiming that if they had worked hard enough and lived with Colombian ideals, they wouldn’t have starved. 

Over the next few years, the RNC began tightening their leash around Colombia. The press was now completely state controlled, higher education was banned, and the homeless and jobless were forced to either join the Armed Forces or serve their sentences in “Patriotism Camps”, which mainly consisted of working as slaves in state-owned super farms. The more corrupt wardens of these camps sold their slaves to other cartels on the side, and a few even kept women as sex slaves. 

The RNC moved on to their next phase of restoring Colombian Glory - the reformation of Gran Colombia. Panama was invaded in 1994, and was swiftly taken over. This filled the RNC with bravado and confidence, and in 1995 Colombia invaded Venezuela. Venezuela was already in the midst of a brutal civil war that was rapidly deteriorating into warlordism and anarchy, and as such, was an easy target. Venezuela was subjugated in a brutal blitzkrieg that rivaled China in their invasion of Taiwan. Soon, Gran Colombia began siphoning large amounts of petroleum from Venezuela to fuel their war machines and aircraft, further securing their military superiority against Venezuela. 

But by 1996, Gran Colombia was not the only country that was battling for control over Venezuela’s oil reserves: the Second Empire of Brazil, having formed in 1991 in the aftermath of the Sao Paulo Massacre, rolled into Venezuela in a pincer move that shocked and overwhelmed the gargantuan Colombian invasion force. With every refinery captured, Brazil became more powerful, and just a year later Gran Colombia had fully retreated and was fighting to keep Brazil out of Bogota. 

On March 8th, 2000, Gran Colombia officially surrendered to Brazil, in exchange for a marginal degree of autonomy. This was granted in exchange for the complete demilitarization of Colombia, with Brazil in charge of both internal and external security for Colombia. Colombia was still allowed to rule Panama in Brazil’s name, though that was only done on paper as Panama was now under the complete control of the cartels. 

The lack of an armed police force, and the exhausted military of Brazil, led to an unprecedented amount of crime in occupied Colombia, making the Glorious Decades look like Sweden in comparison. Organized crime exploded, leading to the creation of a number of cartels and gangs. One of these, simply known as the Cartel, would rise to be the most powerful cartel before the Great Death, including crime syndicates from during the Glorious Decades. They were more powerful than the Mexican Black Rose, and the Brazilian Sons of the Amazon. By as early as 2002, The Cartel practically controlled all of Colombia from the shadows. Brazil was fine with it, as they received generous kick backs and rare goods obtained by the Panama Syndicate (which cooperated with The Cartel out of fear). “Seeing the Ballet” became a common euphemism for Brazilian soldiers on shore leave to visit the many Cartel-operated brothels. Some even tried the cocktail of powerful drugs that were offered throughout occupied Colombia. 

Throughout the 2000s, The Cartel began to expand their operations into remote parts of South America, battling other local cartels for dominance. Pirates began to avoid the coast of South America for fear of retaliation from the Cartel, which had an uncanny way of training their operatives. Not much was known about the recruitment process, but those that survived had unwavering loyalty to The Cartel. 

During The Cartel’s rise to power after the occupation, they kidnapped a famous Mexican chemist from the Glorious Decades named Miguel “Blanco” Trejo. Trejo had worked under Pablo Escobar during the 1980s and developed many strains of potent and addictive drugs. The Cartel placed him in a laboratory and told him he would die in one week unless he could do one thing: develop a way for them to enhance the combat abilities of their soldiers and operatives. Trejo did the best he could, using modified strains he had developed in 1981 as a base. In that time he was only able to make a potent paralytic drug that caused floods of pleasure and pleasant hallucinations. Trejo was spared, as The Cartel leadership (a man known only as The Vulture) believed that with some modifications, this chemical could become a very lucrative product. 

Trejo was given a luxurious private laboratory in a bunker beneath Bogota, and while he was told to devote at least a part of his time to developing a combat-enhancing drug, he was also able to develop and refine this lucrative wonder drug. Further strains ended up being so addictive, that many of Trejo’s guards got hooked on the stuff. At the request of The Vulture, the paralytic agent was toned down to just a mild sedative. One of the withdrawal symptoms of the drug was excessive fatigue, leading addicts to resort to desperate but usually non-violent methods to satisfy their cravings. 

By the mid 2000s, the drug was finished and had been tailored exactly to The Vulture’s specifications. Bromista, as it came to be known, was a game changer. The Cartel quickly gained control of local governments throughout South America, and other cartels waged war on them to find out the secret to their success. Druglords across Latin America tried to recreate the potency of Bromista but nothing came close. Rival cartels, such as Black Rose, engaged in chemical espionage and stole the formula for Bromista, though not that it mattered: the drug was so ubiquitous by that time that Black Rose was able to begin production of their own variant, Bromista could be found as far north as New York City, USA and as far south as Rio Grande, Argentina. 

The Cartel’s power grew rapidly, and The Vulture grew ever greedier. He began to plan an attack on the Brazilian occupiers and to expand his criminal empire. An uprising at a large plantation on October 10th, 2009 was the start of his rebellion, and the rest of Colombia saw it as a call to arms. Unknown to most however was the fact that it was a collaboration between The Cartel and Venezuelan Red Hand Guerillas. What The Cartel did not expect was the indiscriminate destruction the Venezuelans caused. The entire plantation was later razed to the ground, and farms across the country went up in flames. Improvised explosives turned Bogota into a labyrinth of death, and the major roads into Brazil were all mined to the point that they were uncrossable by The Cartel’s forces. 

The Cartel quickly betrayed their Venezuelan allies and the state soon descended into a civil war between anarchist partisans, Cartel mercenaries, and Brazilian troops. Forests burned in the conflict, blanketing Colombia in a thick layer of smog that hovered there for years. This was further compounded when on March 27th, 2011, a massive tropical storm devastated Colombia’s coast, destroying the remaining functioning farms in the north. Brazil gradually stopped sending reinforcements, and as of January 1st, 2013, Brazil completely pulled out of Colombia though they still claimed them as their territory. 

The Civil War continued, and after the Great Heatwave of 2015, The Cartel finally fractured. The Vulture was allegedly killed by one of his own men, and the heatwave destroyed the last functioning greenhouses for their operations. Both the production of Bromista and Sónico (the combat-enhancing drug, which saw only marginal success) were halted, and with it, the power of The Cartel came crashing down. The anarchists did not let up their fight, as they viewed both Brazil and The Cartel as their enemy, and in 2017, became the sole inheritors of what was once Colombia. 

As the Red Hand left to help “liberate” other countries from Brazil, they left behind a few scattered city states and farming communities that quickly turned on each other and collapsed into warlordism and then true anarchy. The Solar Flare of 2026 disrupted the careful balance of power in the region, and even the Black Rose began to struggle to control their workers. 

By 2027, Colombia is now two dozen independent city-states in a wasteland patrolled by cartels, bandits, and cannibals. Across the countryside, hundreds of farms are controlled by the Black Rose, who keep almost 50 million Colombians in a Bromista-induced state of euphoria as they work themselves to death. But even then, every day it becomes harder and harder to pacify their workers, and cartel leadership in Honduras fear that Colombia is a ticking time bomb. 
Venezuela


A pair of Venezuelan soldiers on guard in Caracas during the civil war, photographed sometime between January 16th and February 17th, 1992


The eighth star represents Trinidad, which “voluntarily” joined Venezuela in 1991
Official name: Republic of Venezuela/República de Venezuela (until 1995), Brazilian Governorship of Venezuela and Trinidad/Governança brasileira da Venezuela e Trinidad (1997-2014)
Capital: Caracas
Government Type: Presidential Republic (until 1995), Military Occupation (1995-2014)
Population as of final census conducted: 49,516,654 (Circa 2010)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 27,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $6.378 Billion USD
Primary Language: Venezuelan Spanish/Español Venezolano
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: COMECON (until 1994)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

In the 1970s, Venezuela remained relatively poor and destitute. Despite having obscene amounts of oil, they could not compete with the dirt cheap Iranian oil that flowed like water out of the Middle East. Venezuela never had any financial crises in the 1980s, either, and the constant economic stagnation forced the marginally left-wing government to implement reforms in an attempt to diversify its economy to not just oil production and tourism. 

After the Crash of 1988, President Marcos Ortega Barrientos saw a dramatic increase to the demand for Venezuela’s oil. Countries across the globe were lining up to get their share of the oil to keep their economies running, and soon Venezuelan ports were struggling to accommodate the unprecedented influx of ships. From 1988 to 1990, Venezuela saw a monumental increase to their standard of living, being one of the few countries to actually see economic growth after the Crash of 1988. 

However, this made them a target: some countries, growing more desperate by the day, attempted to outright steal oil without paying the Venezuelan government. Others attempted to scuttle rival nation’s ships to get their supplies. It was chaos, and the Venezuelan government considered calling in the United Nations to help police their waters, but after seeing what the United Nations had done to other countries in South America, President Barrientos decided against it, instead dramatically increasing the budget of Venezuela’s military. 

The Hot Summer of 1990 caused tensions to flare up, and the social programs that were almost two decades old broke apart. Food shortages and drought led to protests, which led to riots, and as the government took more and more stringent measures to combat it, they were forced to enact martial law across much of the country. The Hot Summer crippled the rest of the world, and the countries that were once fighting each other for Venezuelan oil were now struggling just to keep their citizens fed. The demand for oil dried up, and soon Venezuela was one of those countries. Spillover of the civil unrest resulted in Venezuela being forced to invade Trinidad (though their dictator was allowed to remain in power) and later Guyana, which became a semi-autonomous region.

This sparked outrage, and on March 12th, 1991, the bombing of a historic government building in Coro signaled the start of the Venezuelan Civil War. Dissatisfaction with previous two decades of government policy caused many to violently resist, turning into its own brand of Venezuelan Anarchy, known as the Red Hand Confederacy. Organized crime syndicates engaged in racketeering and controlled roads, while smugglers sold Venezuelan oil to the highest bidder. Government forces were stretched thin, desperately trying to keep their own men fed well enough to defend their tiny, isolated enclaves. 

Skirmishes around refineries led to massive oil explosions and uncontrollable wildfires, causing what was left of emergency services to be overwhelmed and thousands to choke on the fumes. Many on the coast resorted to piracy and intensive fishing to feed their population, and on the border of the country, bandits routinely raided villages in neighboring nations. 

By 1995 the Civil War had become just a couple hundred isolated anarchic city-states resisting cartels that routinely fought over the same oil refineries. It was here that Gran Colombia invaded Venezuela, expecting little resistance like in Panama. They could not have been more wrong, however, as this gave every Venezuelan a common enemy and the Red Hand once again went to work destabilizing the oppressors. 

On July 3rd, 1996, the Red Hand had just kicked Colombia out of Caracas when just a few days later, refugees fleeing north spread the word that Brazil was preparing to invade. Minister Augusto Fernando César had seen the state of chaos that Venezuela was in and saw it as an opportunity to keep Brazil’s farm equipment running, not to mention their military. Plans had been drafted up in early 1996 and he waited for the Colombians to be defeated by the Venezuelans before he made his move. 

Colombia retreated to defend Bogota, leaving Venezuela wide open and Brazil moved in to squeeze it of all it was worth. It was made a priority to capture the refineries with minimal gunfire, and with each refinery Brazil captured, their military doubled in efficiency. Brazil had a lot of old police and military equipment left over from the days of the United Nations Anti-Drug Task Force in the 1980s, plus some old Vietnam-era surplus equipment. They carpet-bombed cities into submission, and blasted coastlines with their Navy.

Brazil overwhelmed Venezuela, and on January 28th, 1997, the last major city-state - Barquisimeto - officially surrendered. Captured soldiers were taken hostage and sent to prison farms in southern Brazil. The Partisan army was composed of both sexes, and some female soldiers chose suicide rather than becoming the property of some Brazilian commander. Red Hand holdouts remained, of course, but as the Brazilians tightened their hold on the country, they offered incentives to citizens who spied for them and reported information about suspected agitators. 

For the Red Hands that remained, they were only further emboldened by the relentless occupation by fascist Brazil. The supposed leader of the Guerillas, a mysterious man known only as “Six”, was killed in a raid outside of El Tigre on March 21st, 1997, and was immediately replaced by a man with a similar personality known as “Seven”. Every time the Brazilians dealt a blow to the Red Hand leadership, another rebel took the helm and carried on the fight. The Red Hands became vigilantes, fighting not just Brazil but bandits that preyed on the countryside. 

By 1999, the Red Hands were being led by “Thirteen” and Brazil had largely given up trying to track them down, instead focusing on holding on to oil production sites. The Red Hands had become noticeably well funded, suddenly sporting old Cold War era Soviet equipment, and cells were appearing across South America. In April 1999, the Ponce Mine in Ecuador was the site of a month-long siege between Brazilian collaborators and Ecuadoran rebels, suspected to be working with the Venezuelans. 

This was followed by the coordinated destruction and burning down of numerous Peruvian farms in 2002, leading Brazil to think that a rebellion was brewing in occupied Peru. However, this was merely a feint and the real operation took place in Venezuela itself, as the main pipeline into Brazil was destroyed in a spectacular and extravagant manner, including many improvised fireworks. This permanently crippled Brazil’s war machine and agricultural production as over 50% of the world’s remaining oil supply went up in flames. What it did not do is free Venezuela from Brazil’s grip, as Venezuela had a huge amount of arable land remaining. Venezuela’s military governor, General Otávio Mendes Rocha, enacted martial law and allowed all soldiers permissions to shoot with lethal intent. 

The Red Hand reduced their operations and stayed under the radar the best they could, planning their next offensive. The Red Hand had cells of operatives, called Fingers, in almost every occupied territory in Latin America, making alliances with both Socialist Mexico and the USSR. Later on, the Democratic People’s Republic of Argentina would send them military equipment and intel, using them as a proxy to keep fascist Brazil distracted and in the north. The Red Hand created a vast network of informants and spies, using the homeless and destitute to listen into Brazil’s plans. 

The next revolt began on December 16th, 2005 in Guyane. Laotian refugees, using their skills taught to them by their fathers and grandfathers during the Vietnam War, worked with the Red Hand to engage in an elaborate game of cat and mouse with the Brazilians. For the next decade, Brazil lost almost 100,000 men trying to keep the farms in Guyane functioning and flowing to Brazil. The governor of Guyane, General Aurélio Vargas Monteiro, was later executed on January 4th, 2006, for his failure to stop the rebellion. 

It was the operation in Guyane that got Argentina’s attention, and they began to plot to destabilize Brazil once and for all. Despite their numerous attempts to break free from Brazil, the Red Hand had not succeeded in liberating any country from their grip, not even their own. That changed in 2009, when Argentina brokered an alliance between The Cartel in Colombia and the Red Hand, and the October 10th Uprising happened that year. The Cartel had vastly more resources than the Red Hand, and soon were on the offensive against Brazil. A tropical storm in 2011 and relentless resistance forced Brazil to finally retreat in 2013, and that was where the next phase of the plan came into fruition. 

On May 20th, 2013, “Thirteen”, or as his true name was soon revealed, Anastase Herrero Perez, voluntarily turned himself in at the Governor’s Palace in Caracas. The Military Dictator of Brazil, Augusto Fernando César, came to personally execute Thirteen and cut off the Red Hand. This was exactly what they were hoping for, and a well-hidden bomb in the foundation of the Palace caused the entire structure to collapse inwards, killing both Thirteen and César. In retaliation, Brazil sent in a massive amount of forces, and left much of their military unorganized. Disagreements between the Imperial Forces and the Emperor of Brazil, César Henrique Morales, led to a breakdown in command and starting the Brazilian Civil War. 

The Red Hand finally got what they wanted, as Brazil fully retreated from Venezuela by 2014. This resulted in a new problem, as The Cartel, looking to get revenge on the destruction the Red Hand had wrought, moved into Venezuela and forced much of the population to work to death on plantations. Those that escaped The Cartel fought tooth and nail to resist, but in the areas the Cartel didn’t control, bandits and warlords enacting their own vengeance for the vigilantism the Red Hand conducted in the 2000s. 

The Red Hand of course had the last laugh, as The Cartel collapsed in the aftermath of the Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016, ending in a full uprising throughout the summer of 2017. While The Cartel would never threaten Venezuela again, numerous warlords constantly prevented the Red Hand from fully liberating Venezuela. Throughout the 2020s, the Red Hand, aided by Argentina, slowly began to pacify Venezuela, though they faced setbacks in the aftermath of the 2026 Solar Flare. 

By 2027, Venezuela is under civil war between hardcore members of the Red Hand who don’t want to abandon their anarchist roots, and pro-Argentine members who want to establish a socialist republic with the goal of eventually joining Argentina as an autonomous republic. 
Guyana

Official name: Republic of Guyana (until 1991), Venezuelan Occupied Guyana (1991-1995), Brazilian Governorship of Guyana/Governança brasileira da Guiana (1995-2015)
Capital: Georgetown
Government Type: Presidential Republic (1979-1991), Military Occupation (1991-2015)
Population as of final census conducted: 1,883,086 (Circa 2010)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 600,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $8.28 Billion USD
Primary Language: English
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: World Prosperity Alliance (until 1989)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Guyana did not embrace the new free market initially, instead they tried to maintain their policy of “self reliance”. This only worked until the late 70s, though, and the young government struggled to maintain a hold on their power. Many began to protest the stagnating economy, leading to the Sugar Strikes of 1977-1978. Representatives from the World Prosperity Alliance offered to help negotiate with the workers, but in the end, the government made a deal with the United States and allowed US Strikebreakers in to make the sugar industry functioning again. 

Things remained tenuous at best, and when on November 18th, 1978 Jim Jones carried out the Jonestown Massacre and all claims of legitimacy by the current government of Guyana vanished. Due to the cultural stagnation, hedonism, and ennui, over 2,000 people ended up dying that day, including US Congressman Ronald Reagan, who had been investigating Jones. 

The people of Guyana had had enough, and on January 21st, 1979, a violent coup deposed the government of Guyana, replacing it with a populist right-wing conservative government modeled after much of the United States and Europe. Throughout the 1980s, this new Guyana would try to emulate the wealth of First-World Countries and worked closely with China to build many super-factories across their country. Entire forests were cut down, leading to almost 99% of Guyana’s wilderness to vanish by 1988. 

Guyana never had a chance to see the prosperity promised to them, as after the Crash of 1988, Guyana experienced shortages of just about everything: cooking oil, fuel, sugar and rice all became scarce and expensive. The economy completely crashed in 1989, and the right-wing government was replaced with a rag-tag coalition of left-wing politicians after a snap election on March 15th, 1989. The left-wing government devoted almost their entire budget to feeding their population and maintaining their living conditions for as long as possible, but by the Hot Summer of 1990 people began to bake in the savanna that had replaced the jungle. Riots and marital law ensued, and people started to raid military depots for rations to eat.

On April 25th, 1991, Venezuela, chasing anti-government rebels, invaded Guyana, claiming that it was always their territory anyway. Nobody recognized this claim, and as a result from the ensuing violence plus the droughts, famine, and economic conditions, throughout the 1990s much of Guyana would become depopulated with people fleeing to perceived stability of places like Brazil, Argentina, Colombia, and some even as far as Mexico. 

On August 26th, 1995, Brazil would invade Guyana as well, kicking out Venezuela and invading them for their oil. Members of the old government, who were effectively ruling city states that all simultaneously claimed to be the “new” capital, surrendered and collaborated with Brazil in exchange for keeping their power of the cities. Brazil agreed, though a general of the Imperial Forces was still selected to be the governor of the new State. 

Despite much of the wildlife being destroyed in the 1980s, Guyana still had a (comparably) large amount of arable land. Brazil began to set up intensive farming operations that maximized the efficiency and production yield of staple crops such as rice and wheat. Due to the small population that remained, Brazil didn’t need to keep as strong of a force there, and for a while, the citizens of occupied Guyana were content to be a part of Brazil. After all, it seemed like almost 25 years of corruption had finally ended, and now many people had a steady supply of food and water. 

That all changed in 2009, when various members of The Cartel began to expand their operations in Guyana. Guyana had gained the reputation of being a peaceful, backwater state of the new Brazilian Empire, and thus The Cartel viewed it as the perfect place to set up shop. The Cartel slowly and subtly bribed their way into controlling most of the local governments, and then diverted greenhouses to growing supplies for Bromista. People began to vanish off the streets, and Brazil always turned a blind eye. This was noticed by the Red Hand, who established a finger in 2010, and they engaged in counter-attacks involving monkeywrenching and other forms of sabotage. 

In the Great Heatwave of 2015, the Red Hand’s sabotages were revealed to have worked too well, and Guyana’s agricultural system could not be revived on a meaningful scale. Both Brazil and The Cartel abandoned their holdings, and those that remained fell into a vicious cycle of anarchy and warlordism. Between 2017 and 2027, various smaller cartels attempted to set up growing operations in Guyana, but they were always destroyed by severe storms, flooding, or sabotage. The Solar Storm of 2026 destroyed any hope of a unified Guyana. The Red Hand attempted to form communes in Guyana, but they were seen as no better than the Cartel and were always driven out. 

By 2027, Guyana is a barely-livable wasteland controlled by a dozen warlords. 
Suriname

Official name: Republic of Suriname/Republiek Suriname (until 1992), Brazilian Governorship of Suriname/Governança brasileira do Suriname (1992-2013)
Capital: Paramaribo
Government Type: Parliamentary Republic (until 1988), Far Left Junta (1988-1992), Military Occupation (1992-2013)
Population as of final census conducted: 1,727,611 (Circa 2010)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 450,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $186.4 Million USD
Primary Language: Dutch
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: World Prosperity Alliance (until 1992)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

In 1980, the newly formed government of Suriname managed to foil the planned military coup, but Suriname’s quality of life still declined. In the 1980s, Suriname was notoriously corrupt and considered one of the poorest countries in the world. Many corporations donated old and outdated equipment to Suriname for tax cuts, and lavish fundraisers were held in Suriname’s name, though if it actually helped Suriname is debatable. 

After the Crash of 1988, and with whatever foreign aid that actually made it to Suriname drying up completely, a far-left revolutionary group took over the government. This group, called the Unidad Rood-Zwart, or “Red-Black Unity”, did actually manage to keep the government functioning for a while, running through the Hot Summer of 1990 completely fine, which cannot be said for a majority of the world, as the Hot Summer of 1990 was the first true test of those that survived the Sinai War. While the Unidad Rood-Zwart was efficient, they were not by any means popular, and by early 1992 people were emigrating en masse to other countries much like what was happening in Guyana. 


On October 8th, 1992, Brazil would invade Suriname as they viewed the leftist government as a threat. Suriname, which had already been thoroughly depopulated, did not put up much of a resistance. By New Years of 1993, Suriname was already a fully integrated state of Brazil. The lack of any organized resistance allowed Brazil to keep a tight hold over the state for two decades, before finally being forced to relinquish control after a forest fire on August 8th, 2013. 

In the early 2000s, Brazil secretly worked with China, despite it being an openly leftist government. Part of this secret operation included building destructive mining sites across Suriname to access their huge reserves of precious metals. These Chinese refineries poisoned the soil and caused huge clouds of smog to choke the air in neighboring Guyana and Guiana. Suriname’s gold helped create an illusion of legitimacy to Brazil’s Real Novo. When China vanished from the continent in 2007, Brazil struggled to keep their refineries running, before finally being forced to close them in 2012. 

After Brazil abandoned Suriname in 2013, various cartels and pirates used parts of the coast as safehouses or attempted to start up growing operations. Refugees fleeing from the Brazilian Civil War and the famines of 2015 and 2016 passed through Suriname, but no large settlements remained. Paramaribo became a haven for smugglers and pirates, and drugs, women, and later human flesh were all sold en masse until it all burned down in the Solar Storm of 2026. 

By 2027, Suriname is in anarchy, ruled by pirates, gangs, cartels and cannibals. 
French Guiana/Guiana

Official name: Guyane (1989-1992), Brazilian Governorship of Guyane/Governança brasileira da Guiana (1992-2015), New Laos (2015-2019)
Capital: Cayenne 
Government Type: French Overseas Department (until 1989), Far-Right Populist Dictatorship (1989-1992), Military Occupation (1992-2015), Far-Left Confederacy (2015-2019)
Population as of final census conducted: 1,303,465 (Circa 2010)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 300,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $4.562 Billion USD
Primary Language: French
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Mediterranean Economic Alliance (until 1989)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

French Guiana remained one of the last colonial territories of the modern world. During the Vietnam War, many Laotian refugees were resettled to French Guiana, who all integrated themselves into the local culture. The Green Plan was a bit more successful, as help from China modernized their factories and production models. Movements for Guyane independence would actually fizzle out during the 1980s, as the economic splendor of Europe made many want to stay as a part of France. 

The Crash of 1988 forced France to spend billions of Euros to keep French Guiana afloat. On May 31st, 1989, the newly elected PCF President Arlette Pascal legally relinquished France’s claim on the nation, citing it as “imperialist”. Without France to help them, the government of Guyane struggled to maintain a hold on their population. The Hot Summer of 1990 is what finally crippled them, and the military staged a coup to take over the government and prevent total anarchy. 

Guyane, much like Suriname and Guyana, actually had a relatively large amount of arable land, which when coupled with a small population meant that their government could usually keep them fed past the Hot Summer. The main issues were power outages, heatwaves and drought. The far-right military government used extreme force to keep everyone in line, and Guyane survived two years like this until on January 26th, 1992, when Brazil invaded and annexed them. The military had been focusing so hard on maintaining order that they were blindsided when 10 million Brazilians marched across their border and had placed the flag of Imperial Brazil in Cayenne. 

Brazil had to keep their population fed or else risk a Sao Paulo Massacre 2.0, so Guyane was turned into one giant plantation. Occasional uprisings would occur, but would always be beaten down by the Governor of the State, Aurélio Vargas Monteiro. That was, until December 2005, when the Red Hand of Venezuela would ally themselves with the Laotian population of Guyane and they would launch a revolt against Brazil. This revolt escalated into a decade-long guerilla war, which finally ended with the Great Heatwave of 2015 and Brazil retreated. 

Soon the Laotians and their Red Hand allies were facing a new threat: the cartels looking to recoup their losses after the heatwaves. The Red Hand was a bit more successful in establishing communes in Guyane as opposed to Guyana and Suriname, and for a brief period of time Guyane was known as New Laos. 

In 2019, the Provisional Governor of Amapa, Coronel Álvaro Tavares de Moura, attempted to retake Guyana for the rapidly collapsing Brazilian Empire. New Laos requested aid from their allies in Venezuela, but none came, as the Red Hand was busy fighting the remnants of The Cartel. Brazil would fail in their conquest, as a group of pirates would end up destroying what little order remained in New Laos. The Los Hijos del Mar Bravo took over the coast, and after being wiped out by neighboring cartels just a year later, the area once known as Guyane and New Laos would be plagued by warlords trying to exploit the land. The 2026 Solar Storm did nothing to stop the fighting. 

By 2027, the land is still the battleground of feudal warlords, with the Red Hand unlikely to ever honor their promise to help reclaim it. 

Ecuador

Official name: Republic of Ecuador/República del Ecuador (until 1993), Brazilian Governorship of Ecuador/Governo brasileiro do Equador (1993-2023), Free Republic of Ecuador/República Libre del Ecuador (2015-2023, disputed)
Capital: Quito
Government Type: Presidential Republic (1976-1993), Military Occupation 1993-2023)
Population as of final census conducted: 37,049,097 (Circa 2010)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 20,400,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $179.8 Million USD
Primary Language: Ecuadorian Spanish/Español Ecuatoriano
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (1976-1992)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

Ecuador was one of the few nations to already be in an economic crisis when the Crash of 1988 came around. Initially, they had seen the record growth and hedonistic splendor of the Glorious Decades, only for it to evaporate in 1987. 

Guillermo Rodríguez did not maintain as wide of a supporter base as he did just a few years earlier, and just a few months later, on July 17th, 1972, the military dictatorship collapsed, and was replaced by a far-left junta supported by the USSR and Cuba. This “New Revolutionary Council” initially promised social and economic reforms, such as nationalizing the oil industry in 1973. Yet as the years dragged on, the Council debated on if such a goal was worthwhile, as both China and the USSR had seen rapid changes. This lack of coordinated response doomed the junta, and on January 1st, 1975, the Council officially relinquished their power to a civilian government. Elections were held on November 15th, 1976, and the Social Christian Party’s own Dr. Álvaro Egas Cordero won the presidency. 

President Cordero used the oil revenue funds to bankroll various startups around the country, and by 1979 one of them had risen above all of the rest: El Oro Exportaciones, a banana plantation company that quickly began buying up large swaths of the countryside. EOE expanded their operations, and in 1980 opened their first cacao plantation. President Cordero ensured that their workers were paid very little, and had very few rights, and the price of their products were ludicrously cheap as a result. This won them very close ties with the United States and China, as their products began to be seen all across the world. It was reported in 1981 that Ecuador produced over 70% of the world’s bananas. 

This all fell apart on March 6th, 1987, when three massive earthquakes devastated Napo, Ecuador. The disruption in the economy had a cascading effect, resulting in Ecuador going into a depression. Over 2,000 would die from the earthquakes alone, with almost 20,000 missing or injured. In April 1987, the Ecuadorian government was forced to take out several massive loans from the IMF and China. These loans went to repairing their infrastructure and keeping their exports flowing, as the earthquake had damaged many roads in the northern provinces. President King himself sent several American engineers to help rebuild Ecuador, and more importantly, keep the bananas, cacao and oil flowing. 

So when the Crash of 1988 rolled around, Ecuador was already struggling to get out of their economic depression. They were not hit that hard, as much of their population was still unemployed and the government was in massive debt. Ecuador actually managed to bounce back in 1989 and 1990, selling oil to the desperate nations in the Americas. They weren’t as popular or easily accessible as Venezuela, but for a few months everything seemed like it could go back to the splendor of the 1980s. Rationing had already been introduced in the summer of 1987, so the Hot Summer of 1990 was not as impactful as it was for other nations. 

But because the conservative government had prioritized the economic recovery of the nation instead of the wellbeing of their citizens, and also dedicating plantations to grow large amounts of crops for export that then rotted on drydocks, by 1991 everyone in Ecuador was just barely hanging on. Famines and drought due to mismanagement of land are thought to have been responsible for almost 10,000 deaths throughout 1991-1992. The election of 1992 resulted in a new coalition government between the Ecuadorian Socialist Party and the Democratic Left Party, and their first priority was the restructuring of Ecuador’s agricultural industry and using their leftover oil to fuel their farming equipment. 

This government, despite claiming to have everyone’s best interests in mind, quickly capitulated to Brazil when they came knocking in May of 1993. Brazil then began to exploit Ecuador’s natural resources even more brutally than the conservative government in the Glorious Decades. This of course led to widespread civil unrest, with Ecuadorian collaborators being strung up by mobs and pipelines being sabotaged. They were not organized, however, and Brazil quickly suppressed each one. 

That was until the Red Hand established a Finger in Ecuador, and orchestrated the Ponce Mine Siege of 1999. Further sabotage operations and monkeywrenching made it impossible for Brazil to extract any Ecuadoran petroleum by 2001. And yet, Brazil never tightened their grip on the populace. The Red Hand had forced Brazil to abandon all mining operations by 2002, and as such Ecuador became one giant intensive farming operation. 

Due to its climate, or as some would say, sheer luck, the Brazilian Governorship of Ecuador managed to survive the Great Heatwave of 2015 with their farms barely intact. They were not spared during the Great Heatwave of 2016, though, and plants fried in the oppressive sun all across the country. Extreme weather events and tropical super-storms started to ravage the coast, and by 2017 the western half of the country was completely uninhabitable. 

The remnants of the Brazilian Empire managed to hold on to the eastern half of the state for quite some time, constantly battling incoming Venezuelan revolutionaries and Colombian cartels. On January 1st, 2023, Brazil’s forces finally retreated back into the Amazon Basin, and Ecuador was now its own country once again. This quickly devolved into a civil war between the numerous remaining factions in Ecuador.

As of 2027, Ecuador is still under civil war conditions between far-right fascist collaborators who want to desperately hold on to their power, far-left revolutionaries supported by Venezuela and Argentina, and ruthless cartels who seek to exploit both. 


Photo taken by a journalist of a river outside of Sao Paulo, Brazil, 1991
Brazil

Official name: Federative Republic of Brazil/República Federativa do Brasil (1980-1991), Second Empire of Brazil/Segundo Império do Brasil (1991-2013), Brazilian Emergency Government/Governo de Emergência Brasileiro (2013-2027)
Capital: Brasilia (until 1991), São Paulo (Civilian branch, 1991-2013) and Rio De Janeiro (Military branch, 1991-2027) 
Government Type: Federal Republic (1980-1991), Far Right Military Junta (1991-2027)
Population as of final census conducted: 423,694,861 (Circa 2010), 688,030,405 (total population of all occupied territories)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 300,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $1.89 Trillion USD
Primary Language: Brazilian Portuguese/Português Brasileiro
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (until 1991)
Great Death Survival Rating: Remnant

Brazil remained a military dictatorship at the signing of the Shanghai Accords, but the policies of “abertura” and “distensão” were much more successful, leading to the military’s authority to rapidly decline by 1975. Access to cheap, reliable oil kept the economy functioning smoothly, though the country remained relatively closed off during the 1970s. The military junta held on for dear life, as they were desperate to keep their power. With Asia seen as stable for the time being after the signing of the Hanoi Armistice on April 1st, 1975, Washington, DC turned their focus on the Americas and maintaining a peaceful region to conduct business in. Panama was already under control by the United Nations by that point, and one of President Morgan’s first goals in office was to keep South America in a state acceptable to the new world order. 

From June 1st-7th, 1977, the United States held a bilateral summit with Brazil’s President Ernesto Geisel. President Morgan, speaking as if he was some wise father giving his son advice, urged President Geisel to consider opening up Brazil more. The communists of China were no longer their enemies, but their greatest trading partners, and soon the USSR would follow suit. By 2000, he had said, communism would be completely extinct, with everyone living lives of splendor and wealth. 

The summit ended up going nowhere, and despite the growing viewpoint that the military was seen as unnecessary as the Korean Detente continued and the Vietnam War officially ended, the government reasserted themselves as the only thing keeping Brazil together. Widespread protests in 1978 and 1979 and a constantly nosediving approval rating forced the government to reluctantly authorize a referendum on returning Brazil to civilian rule. This was of course a ruse, and the military junta rigged the vote in their favor. This was heavily criticized, and only after the threat of an invasion by an international US-led coalition did the military relent and back down. 

On October 29th, 1980, Brazil held their first free election in decades. President Morgan attended the election to ensure it was free and fair, and after MDB candidate Dr. Renato Borges de Alencar won, President Morgan congratulated him on securing the presidency and hoped that Brazil and the United States could work together for the prosperity of both of their countries. Dr. de Alencar ran on a platform on opening up trade and signing the Shanghai Accords, and also tackling the rising crime rate that was plaguing much of Latin America. 

President de Alencar made good on his promise, and within his first 50 days in office he worked closely with President Morgan to integrate Brazil into the United Nations Anti-Drug Task Force. Throughout 1981, Brazil opened up several bases for the UNADTF, and conducted numerous drug raids in the slums of Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo. As Brazil opened up and became a part of the global community, their economy skyrocketed, quickly becoming the richest country in South America behind Uruguay. To compete with the other giants of the world, Brazil expanded their space program on March 1st, 1982. China would work closely with Brazil, signing an exclusive petroleum deal on the one-year anniversary of the expansion of their space program. Chinese technicians would train Brazilian scientists and test data was shared between the two nations, blossoming into Brazil joining the International Station for Cooperation and Friendship. 

Soon China became an even closer ally to Brazil than the United States, and factories and industrial parks sprung up across the southern regions of Brazil. China ended up building three SIZ in Brazil: one in Belo Horizonte, one in Vitoria, and one in Janaúba. Captured criminals were sent to serve their sentence working in the sweatshops, at China’s suggestion. Dr. Renato Borges de Alencar was reelected in the 1984 election, and his new administration was even harsher on crime and open to industrialization. Throughout 1985, almost half of the Amazon Rainforest was auctioned off to logging companies and pharmaceutical companies. President de Alencar’s administration was even more rabid against drug trafficking, and was one of the countries to participate in the June 11th, 1986 raid that killed Pablo Escobar. Brazil would have much to celebrate, as the detective who deduced where he was hiding was a Brazilian: Agent Augusto Fernando César. His unique mind led the investigation out of Mexico and into Colombia. Agent César quickly became the most requested agent in the UNADTF’s operations, and President de Alencar allowed him to help in investigations in exchange for political favors. These off the record deals led to Brazil’s police receiving the most advanced military equipment available at the time, and the US worked very closely with Brazil in carrying out drug busts throughout South America in the late 1980s. Brazil’s space program was also going very smoothly, as their space program made their first successful orbit on April 23rd, 1987. 

But then the Crash of 1988 happened, and Brazil desperately tried to stay as a rising power. Soon the UNADTF fell apart, with Agent César retiring to being just a policeman again. Countries around Brazil started to enter a decline, and with many countries suddenly now extremely protectionist, the booming economy crashed. PSP candidate Ulysses José Franco, after platforming on a campaign of social programs while also encouraging trade with other nations, narrowly won the 1988 presidency. In practice though, many of the programs fell through due to corruption and mismanagement, causing the black market to become almost a quarter of Brazil’s remaining economy. Like other countries, the Franco administration continued business as usual and expected the Crash to resolve itself in a few years. Some criticized him as being a communist like Gutierrez in Mexico, while others said he wasn’t going far enough. 

President Franco, trying to stop the spread of the “Argentine Mistake”, began sending huge amounts of foreign aid to Paraguay to keep their economy afloat. This caused many in the country to doubt his intentions. With each package of aid sent, be it medicine, food, water, or industrial equipment, Argentina would send a bigger shipment to one-up Brazil and curry more favor with Paraguay. It only finally stopped when President Franco was threatened with impeachment for sending over one billion reals worth of industrial supplies to Paraguay. 

The Hot Summer of 1990 put Brazil to the test, and they failed. Civil unrest rose to an all-time high, despite the rampant and extremely militarized police force. All the way to the end of 1990, President Franco held over a hundred trade summits with other countries, hoping to rekindle international trade, but all of them turned out fruitless. This was further exacerbated when on November 2nd, 1990, Brazil spent almost a billion reals on a failed orbital launch. President Franco then gave a long-winded speech on how Brazil needs to be hopeful, and that if they cannot manage to reach the stars, then what hope do they have of maintaining a good trading relationship with the other nations when the depression is over?

Morale was at an all time low, as hundreds deserted their posts in the military and police. Almost every major city was under martial law, and more factories shut down every day. Unemployment was reaching record numbers, and even a rent freeze did not put an end to the army of homeless that grew every day. Brazil was a powder keg, and soon something would cause the whole system to come crashing down, completely. The answer was, what would cause it to happen?

The answer came on January 20th, 1991, in a slum outside Sao Paulo. A government-controlled warehouse was found to be empty of their stock (a corrupt officer had probably sold the emergency food rations for a quick real) and a riot ensued. The heavily armed and over-militarized police opened fire on the crowd and ended up killing 230 people. President Franco didn’t have that much to say on it, calling it “regrettable” and hoped that in the future, horrible situations like this could be avoided. While he authorized the building of large farms in the remains of the Amazon Forest, opposition leader César Henrique Morales used it as a talking point. He said that the massacre was proof that the far-left model didn’t work, and that it was the President's fault that the crime rate had gotten so bad. Franco’s administration was painted as corrupt and incompetent, and if Brazil is going to get better, they must return to their roots: an anti-communist dictatorship. Morales further promised to completely rid Brazil of all crime, as criminals would be forced to work in the northern farms, and for more violent crimes, put to death. 

Morales quickly gained support across the entire nation, and calls to impeach President Franco grew and grew until on March 15, 1991 the opposition impeached President Franco. The next day, the Brazilian State Police executed Ulysses José Franco by hanging, as investigations by Agent Augusto Fernando César claimed to have found evidence of drug deals and corruption within the Franco administration. Over the next few weeks, Brazil was reformed into a military junta once again. 

However, this new military dictatorship operated in a unique way: there were essentially two dictators, one for civilian and internal affairs and one for military and external affairs. On April 9, 1991, César Henrique Morales proclaimed himself the civilian leader of Brazil, ruling in Sao Paulo, while Augusto Fernando César became the military leader of Brazil, ruling from Rio de Janeiro. To solidify his power, Morales removed the power of the states and Brazil was now an “empire” as opposed to a federation. 

Morales, now simply taking on the title of “leader”, passionately warned his people that the leftist chaos in Argentina and Uruguay would spread no further, and Brazil would become a beacon against communism where places like the United States had failed. Leader Morales created the “neighborhood watches”, and tasked them to always be on the lookout for drug runners and “Argentine spies”. Meanwhile, Minister César started recruiting large amounts of unemployed Brazilians into the military and police, with incentives such as access to clean water, air conditioning and reliable food. 

It was all a stop-gap measure though, as those in power knew that Brazil could not sustain its population without another Sao Paulo massacre happening. So, why not expand Brazil’s arable land? asked Leader Morales. He then proposed to Minister César to create a plan to prevent the spread of communism in Latin America, stop drugs from taking over the slums of Brazil, and at the same time ensure that Brazil would never have a ration riot again. 

This plan came into fruition on August 12th, 1991, when Brazil launched a surprise invasion of their neighbor, Peru. Peru had recently been taken over by the Shining Path Maoists and turned Peru into a hideous communist state, and so Leader Morales led the charge in putting their neighbors on the right path. Due to the brutality of the Shining Path and their myriad of sub-factions, the people of Peru were actually grateful that Brazil had come and saved them from the Maoists. Peru collaborated willingly, for the most part, and on January 5th, 1992, Peru officially became a new state of the Second Empire of Brazil. 

This resulted in severe backlash in the United Nations, as other states, notably the USSR and Australia called the act “monsterous” and an act of international war. Ambassador Álvaro Tavares Coutinho, speaking on behalf of Brazil, defended the action and blamed the United States’s capitulation to communist China as the reason why geopolitics in the Middle East were the way they were, and resulted in the Crash of 1988. In short, he blamed communism on the reason why Peru was now a part of Brazil. 

Then on October 29th, 1991, Brazil intervened in the Bolivian Civil War by backing up the fascist faction that controlled North Bolivia. Negotiations between Leader Morales and the general of the Bolivian State, Rodolfo Quiroga Salvatierra, started off on the signing of a formal alliance between the two nations. But on November 2nd, 1991, General Salvatierra was found dead. Brazil immediately claimed it was the result of the Argentine-supported socialists to the south, and annexed the Bolivian State to prevent the further spread of communism. The Bolivian State was just as eager to fight the communists in South Bolivia and thus enjoyed a relative degree of autonomy compared to the later territorial acquisitions of Brazil. The Brazilian Governorship of Bolivia and the Second Empire of Brazil both worked tirelessly for four years to wipe out the rebels in the South, but they were never able to destroy their stronghold in Eduardo Abaroa. 

Emboldened by their victories in Peru and North Bolivia, Leader Morales authorized the "reclamation" of Brazilian property that President Franco had illegally given to Paraguay as foreign aid. The operation took place concurrently with the South Bolivian Campaign, and while Brazil initially made rapid progress and was close to taking Asunción, Argentina came to their rescue and turned the invasion into a stalemate. Minister César was a bit smarter than his counterpart and knew that Brazil could never actually claim Paraguay, so the goal instead became to turn it into a neutral buffer state between Communist Argentina and Imperial Brazil. 

Even with the new resources coming in from North Bolivia and Peru, Brazil was still teetering on the brink of total starvation. They had used almost a quarter of their remaining petroleum in their military operations in 1991 alone, and soon they wouldn’t be able to defend Brazil, let alone run her farming equipment. Minister César had been eyeing the anarchy in Venezuela for some time, and was waiting for them to be at their most vulnerable. Meanwhile, on January 26th, 1992, Brazil invaded Guyane, annexing them by the end of the summer. It was from the draconian prison farms in Brazilian Guyane that Brazil managed to avoid a food shortage in 1992. Then on October 8th, 1992, Brazil would turn to Suriname and annex them. The new resources from their new states led to a gradual increase in living conditions around Brazil, and the approval for the military dictatorship was at an all-time high. 

Seeing the socialist coalition government that had formed in Ecuador, Brazil, aided by Peruvian anti-communists, invaded Ecuador on May 4th, 1993. The coalition government quickly surrendered and negotiated to keep as much of their power as they could. Leader Morales initially objected to this and planned to have them executed, however Minister César persuaded him not to, as this would direct the rage of the Ecuadorians to their collaborators who had sold them out, and not to the invading Brazilians. The oil from Ecuador helped supplement Brazil’s supplies, and intensive farming operations throughout the Amazon basin led to a surplus in food production for the first time in years. The oil was also used to fuel the Brazilian war machine in the South Bolivia and Paraguay campaigns but neither operation saw any notable progress on the Brazilian’s side. 

On May 15th, 1994, Brazil’s forces were routed during the Battle of Salto del Guairá and fully pulled out of Paraguay. Minister César personally executed the colonel in charge of the garrison, and began the construction of a fortified border wall along parts of the Paraguayan, Bolivian, Argentine and Uruguayan borders with Brazil. Of this colossal task, only the parts along the Paraguayan border were completed, and even then, the wall completely crumbled by 2013 due to continued erosion and rampant flooding. This defeat forced Brazil to also rethink their strategies regarding South Bolivia, and planned to fully withdraw by January 1st, 1996. 

On August 26th, 1995, in preparation for their operation to take Venezuela and their oil, Brazil invaded Guyana and kicked out the Venezuelan occupiers. Guyana was eager to collaborate, and as such, they were granted a relative amount of autonomy. Ruthless exploitation and intensive farming prevented any famines in Brazil during 1995, but drought started to become a common problem. The civilian government began digging community wells for ground water, and several old industrial facilities were retooled to become water purification plants. Water was, of course, used as a reward: loyalty to the New Party of Brazil guaranteed access to fresh food, meat products, and water. Housing was also based on one's loyalty to the party: many low-ranking officials had nice, clean apartments with air conditioning and proper insulation, while high-ranking officials had entire mansions to themselves, all furnished with resources plundered from the governorships. 

When Brazil fully pulled out of South Bolivia, the dictatorship began to draft up plans for the invasion of Venezuela and later Colombia. On July 7th, 1996, Brazil began the invasion of Venezuela. Brazil ended up invading with a force of almost 35 million soldiers. They took a gamble and reduced their presence in their occupied territories and along the border wall, but it paid off - with every refinery and oil well captured, Brazil’s military power grew exponentially. Soon they were engaging in carpet bombing campaigns and naval blockades, chasing the Colombians out of Venezuela by 1997 and officially annexing Venezuela on January 28th, 1998. 

On February 1st, 1997, speaking in front of the Imperial Mansion in Sao Paulo, Leader Morales announced that he had succeeded in his first promise: he had wiped out the spectre of communism in not just Brazil, but in all of her neighbors as well (both Paraguay and Uruguay were not full on communists yet). He had dared to go where the United States was too scared to go - actively attacking communism -  and had he had been in power in the 1980s, he would never have let the Egyptian Coalition and their communist allies destroy Israel. He now touted the new Brazilian Empire as stronger than the United States, stronger than the USSR, and stronger than China. But now he tackled a new stage in his plan: to wipe out drug traffickers, cartels and smugglers. 

Immediately after this speech, Brazil launched an invasion of Colombia. This invasion was not as intensive as Venezuela, as Brazil was far more cautious and kept a large part of their force in Venezuela as they protected their refineries that kept their war machine running and people fed. By 1998, Colombia was on the defensive and was desperately trying to keep Brazil out of Bogota. Losses were heavy on both sides, but due to Brazil’s genius propaganda and control of the state media, young men enlisted by the millions every month. For every Brazilian soldier the Colombians killed, two more would replace him. A popular recruiting poster depicted a massive graveyard, with Minister César shedding a single tear, captioned with “IT COULD END WITH YOU!”. 

On March 7th, 1998, Brazil joined the Alliance of Nations. As the Alliance of Nations had no hard power and was essentially a forum for ambassadors to shout at each other, Brazil’s ambassador Álvaro Tavares Coutinho defended the actions of Brazil as bringing stability and peace to the chaotic land of Latin America. Despite their position just a few years ago, the USSR and China now supported Brazil’s actions, using them to justify their own territorial expansions. 

In summer of 1998, Brazil embarked on an amphibious landing campaign, launching ships from Ecuador and landing on several sections of Colombia’s coast. This would end up having disastrous results, as chaotic and unpredictable waves made the transportation of troops extremely risky and Brazil was forced to fight their way into Bogota. Troops became bogged down and entrenched, with bombing runs no longer being viable due to the sheer number of possible friendly fire incidents. Quartermasters were reporting ammunition shortages despite supply lines remaining intact, and the Imperial Army of Brazil began a formal investigation into possible sabotage and theft. They concluded that the Red Hand, an anarchist group from Venezuela, were behind the sabotage. They were proven right, as the Ponce Mine Siege in Ecuador happened just a few months later in April 1999. This led to the El Tigre Siege that resulted in “Six” being killed. 

Leader Morales was furious when he learned of the siege, and ordered the State Police of Brazil to investigate this supposed rebel group. And rather than risk defeat like in South Bolivia and Paraguay, Minister César began a grueling scorched earth campaign to take Colombia. In October of 1999, Brazil had finally encircled Bogota and waited for the government to be strung up by its own starving citizens. 

On March 8th, 2000, Gran Colombia officially surrendered, and an armistice was negotiated. Brazil allowed the Colombians a small degree of autonomy, but in actuality, it was because they were exhausted and close to running out of resources. Sabotages and monkeywrenching operations from across the empire were adding up, and the efficiency of the Brazilian army was increasingly in question. 

On top of that, the climate was alternating between dizzying heatwaves and torrential rain, resulting in many buildings falling apart and infrastructure being damaged. Rolling brown outs had started in 1997, progressing to blackouts in 1998 and by 1999 the power was off more often than it was not. If this had happened before the Crash of 1988, the government could simply contract a company from overseas to come fix it, but that was not an option anymore. 

Leader Morales and his advisors struggled to find an easy fix for the problem, as they had no more countries to invade as a distraction. Their people were fed, yes, but that was only until the Venezuelan oil ran out and even then, many of the crops were destroyed by the humidity. Their answer came in the fall of 2000, as China offered to help “modernize” their equipment, for a fee. Leader Morales knew that if his people knew he was working with China, it would ruin him, so he went to great lengths to keep the identity of their “collaborators” a secret. With China’s help, Brazil’s energy sector was revitalized and intensive mining operations began in areas where agriculture was no longer possible. Factories were opened up again, and slowly Brazil’s infrastructure began to be rebuilt. 

Forest fires, drought and famine started to affect the productivity of the occupied territories, and in 2002, Peru would launch an uprising. Fires burned and farms crumbled to ashes, and Brazil mobilized a division in Acre to supplement their forces in occupied Peru. By the time Brazil’s reinforcements had rolled in to help regain order, they had learned it was merely a distraction and that the real target had been the refineries in Venezuela all along. The Red Hand had destroyed Brazil’s access to oil, and soon much of Venezuela burned with it. Brazil’s military was crippled, but Minister César had foreseen such a possibility: back in 1996, while drawing up the plan to invade Venezuela, the Minister ordered the military to start researching on how to build a nuclear bomb. Part of their secret deals in 2000 included negotiating for a nuclear bomb from China, to which they reluctantly agreed to. 

When the Venezuelan Uprising happened, the Brazilian Bomb became the worst-kept secret in the empire. Both dictators made sure to mention it at every possibility, and to make sure that any would-be rebels knew that they risked death by nuclear fire if they tried anything too drastic. What many did not know was that the nuclear bomb was actually not even functional (China knew it was stupid to give a foreign nation a functional nuclear warhead) and that the government of Brazil was going to great lengths to get it working. 

As the oil began to run out, Brazil enacted strict fuel rationing, with most fuel by 2005 being saved solely for military vehicles and for the transportation of supplies. Farming equipment was slowly retrofitted to use coal or steam power instead of oil, and pollution began to choke the skies of South America once again. But for the most part, everyone tolerated the increasing authoritarianism of the dictators. Leader Morales had started to get a massive ego, insisting he be referred to as “Emperor” and even reportedly executing a man for not bowing to him. To help cut back on food costs, as there was less food every year, the guards in prisons and labor camps began to mix the corpses of the dead into the slop they would feed their prisoners. Almost a decade of propaganda had made the people of Brazil view the Red Hand, Argentina and other communists as less than human, and some even took a sick joy in watching the prisoners eat, unaware that they were devouring their comrades. 

The first cracks began to show on December 11th, 2005, when the Red Hand launched another uprising, this time in Guyane. The deteriorating climate and the lack of reliable transportation meant that Brazil risked another Sao Paulo massacre, and so sent in a massive force to retake Guyane. Brazilians across the nation started to die mysterious deaths, and investigations found that it was due to food poisoned by the rebels in Guyane. On February 5th, 2006, Brazil was forced to reduce ration allowances for the first time since 1991. Meat was no longer readily available for everyone outside Morales’s inner circle, and most were reduced to eating vegetarian feijoada. After a food riot in summer of 2007, permanent curfews were enacted to help "ascertain communist collaborators”. Pollution from the Chinese machinery started to corrupt the ground water around Brazil, and many fell ill after drinking the tainted water. Brazil was quickly running out of resources, and to save the rapidly shrinking medical resources, Morales authorized the creation of “mercy doctors”, roaming government agents who would euthanize the sick and elderly under the guise of taking them to some nondescript hospital somewhere in the countryside. Anyone who suggested that the government was murdering them was actually an agent of the Red Hands, afterall! Then, when the Red Flu started to tour Brazil after being spread by Chinese visitors, the government denied any pandemic was happening and that the Red Hand were making up rumors to frighten the good citizens of Brazil. 

For most of 2008 and 2009, Brazil’s government was pulling their hair out trying to stop the spread of the Red Flu. The tainted ground water had made many people’s immune systems weakened, and the Red Flu thrived in the slums of Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. Minister César was playing wack-a-mole with the Red Hands, chasing them up and down the continent trying to track down their new leader. And all the while, Morales stayed holed up in his palace, high off his mind on Bromista and eating lavish feasts of beef and chicken as millions starved to death or died of the Red Flu.

On October 10th, 2009, with Brazil too tired and exhausted from chasing the Red Hand from Tacna to Cayenne, the Colombian uprising began. This was the beginning of the end for Brazil, as the demoralized and hopeless troops of Brazil fought only for their lives. Morales threw hundreds of thousands of lives away trying to regain Colombia (and his source of Bromista), and for almost a year and a half Minister César tried to take back Colombia. After the storm of March 27th, 2011, he realized that it was a lost cause and that Brazil was in its decline. He began to covertly send fewer and fewer reinforcements to Colombia, and secretly began to stockpile weapons and supplies in several bunkers throughout the Amazon Basin. Morales was becoming dangerously unstable, and César knew that he was no longer the charismatic strongman he once was in the 1990s. When Morales asked where he was going, he always claimed it was a lead on the Red Hand. 

Throughout 2012 and 2013, César silently prepared for a coup against Morales, completely pulling out of Colombia by January 1st of 2013. The occupied territories were worked to the bone as the threat of famine loomed. But on May 20th, 2013, César was truthful when he said he was leaving to pursue a lead about the Red Hand. “Thirteen” had voluntarily turned himself in at the Governor’s Palace in Venezuela, and he immediately left. César had long awaited this day, as he could finally put a bullet in the brain of the man who had been a thorn in his side for over a decade. Minister César was already in nearby Boa Vista, and so made the 24 hour journey to Caracas. 

It is unknown exactly what had happened during that day of reckoning, but Brazil leveled the city by June. Morales was expected to make a speech about the death of his friend and fellow dictator, unaware that he was plotting against him, but Morales was too inebriated to say the speech that was prepared for him, let alone show his face in public for risk of assassination. His advisors called him an imbecile, which turned into a shouting match and that was when César’s conspirators decided to execute their plan. Key members of the government, such as the Deputy of Food, the Deputy of Energy, and the Deputy of Justice seized control of various military bases. Others decided to side with Morales, as even though they had plotted against him, they knew that they were unlikely to win without César’s ruthless ingenuity. Morales was ferried to one of César’s bunkers in Redenção, and it was here that he stayed for the next four years, oscillating between being mournfully lucid and gleefully high, having endless orgies with his imperial concubines.

The Brazilian Civil War officially started on June 1st, 2013, when César’s forces attacked a government stronghold outside of Brasília. The Deputy of Propaganda kept up appearances, siding with Morales, and made César’s faction into an underground terrorist group much like the Red Hand. This was only feasible for so long, as on October 9th, 2013, a massive forest fire devastated Suriname and forced Brazil to cut their losses and retreat. Many of the returning soldiers joined César’s faction and started pillaging supply lines out of Guyana and Guyane. Martial law was declared throughout the entire country and sabotage caused the electrical infrastructure to permanently turn off across much of the region. Communications began to break down, and as the plundered resources from the occupied regions dried up, many in Brazil rose up with a Red Hand of vengeance. Far-left guerrilla groups sprung up in every city overnight, and members of the Red Hand from Venezuela began to train Brazilians in the art of guerilla warfare. 

Cities became prisons as the two factions of the government fought to keep their citizens in check. Hit-and-run tactics became suicide bombings, sabotage turned into full on destruction, and many cities along the coast were now controlled by neither faction but the citizens that inhabited them. The Brazilian People’s Army, aided by the Red Hand, made both the Loyalists and the Militarists run in fear. As more and more garrisons were recalled to help the fight in the heartland, the occupied territories began to rebel. The Governor of Peru, General Augusto Ferreira Lobo, was executed by a mob of starving Red Hand insurgents on January 21st, 2014, and it descended into a civil war. Only the northern half of it remained loyal to Brazil until February 7th, 2017, when Argentina came in to support the Peruvian communists. 

The first Great Heat Wave crippled Brazil, and almost 20 million died as a result of famine and dehydration. Soon, people joined the various factions of the civil war not over who they agreed with ideologically, but based on who was able to feed them at the time. Allegiances changed every season. Argentina, seeing how much Brazil had fractured in just a year, invaded the former states of Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina. Brazil was forced to abandon both Guyana and Guyane in 2015, and the western half of Ecuador in 2016. The State of Bolivia was finally lost in 2017. 2017 was a turning point in the Civil War, as Morales was finally assassinated by one of his own men on July 7, 2017. No one was really leading either of the factions by this point, and they were fighting solely for the hatred they felt for the other side, which they viewed as subhuman traitors on the same level of Red Hand communists. 

By 2018, the military government only controlled the former states of Amazonas, Pará, Amapá, Tocantins, Goiás, Minas Gerais, and Rio de Janiero, along with parts of Ecuador, though they quickly became completely cut off by summer of 2018. Much of the eastern coast, between São Luis and Salvador, became a loose alliance of anarchistic city-states, and in between the two military governments and the anarchists, cartels took advantage of the chaos in the no man’s land. In the former state of Roraima, influenced by the Colombian and Central American Cartels, a group would form, calling themselves the Sons of the Amazon. They disrupted the fragile supply lines that supplied both factions of the military and the Red Hand aligned anarchists, and deals were struck with various powerful cartels. Brazilian military equipment and ammunition depots were sold off for Bromista and other drugs, and the members of Morales’s loyalist faction began selling their prisoners to the Sons of the Amazon in exchange for resupplies, unaware that they were buying back their own material. 

The Sons of the Amazon lived up to their name and eventually controlled the remains of the Amazon river, which had been broken up into thousands of tributaries for irrigation back in the early 1990s under Franco, and thus made an effective network to smuggle supplies across the entire country. Supplies covertly sent by Argentina to the Red Hand rebels were seized by the Sons of the Amazon and sold to the highest bidder, usually other cartels. When they had enough manpower, the Sons of the Amazon took over the last remaining functional ships in Brazil’s navy, and harassed every city near the water. The dramatic increase of floods resulted in this form of neo-piracy to be remarkably effective, at least in the sense that they disrupted the three warring factions vying for control of what was once the most powerful nation in Latin America during the 21st Century. 

In 2019, things had become increasingly desperate for the people in South America. Those that weren’t under the drug-induced grip of Bromista were facing chronic famines and flooding that routinely destroyed any hope for large-scale agricultural efforts. Rationing had gotten so strict in the coastal communes that underground “meat rings” had to be shut down by the People’s Army. The Military faction was doing slightly better, as the stockpiled rations meant that those in the command bunkers were barely scraping by, and shady deals with the cartels for food supplies became more and more common. The most common of these smuggled rations were crackers supposedly from the USA and dry, crumbly bars from Europe. 

After the failed attempt to retake Guyane in early 2019, supply lines finally broke down across the entire region controlled by the military remnants and facing severe famine, reports began to circulate of soldiers cannibalizing their dead comrades in arms. The coastal cities finally began to see a slight recovery in late 2019 when Argentina began escorting their shipments with entire navy fleets, and while everyone on the rebel coast was forced to become a vegan, very few starved to death now. 

In March of 2020, the ragged remnants of the two military factions signed a truce and joined forces, realizing that if they continued fighting each other, none of them could ever retake the coast. By now, their forces were just a few isolated bunkers in rural areas supported by several dozen barely functioning military bases. Much of the land north of the original Amazon river was no-man's land, now controlled by the Sons of the Amazon. Coronel Estêvão Nogueira Bastos, the self-appointed Commander of the Brazilian Emergency Government, stopped trying to retake their lost land and instead focused on defending what they still held on to. This led to a policy of “wait and see”, where the crippled military and their loyalist allies (numbering less than 10 million by this point) provoked conflict between the Sons of the Amazon, the Cartels, and the Red Hand rebels and scavenged what they could from the aftermath of the battles. 

The Emergency Government operated like this for the next two years, becoming the new guerillas as they evaded and stole from the cartels and communists. The new equipment from Argentina, plus the Emergency Government recovering their old material from Sons of the Amazon strongholds, resulted in the Sons being wiped out by the end of 2022. This was not the end of the chaos, though, as cartels from Colombia and Central America started to plunder the badlands between the two factions. In the Great Heatwave of 2023 and 2024, almost 50 million would die from dehydration and famine in what was once Brazil. All that Coronel Bastos had regained in the past five years was wiped out, and to further expand their influence, Argentina had begun sending members of their army to help train and reinforce the guerillas along the coast. Coronel Bastos later committed suicide on May 19th, 2026, and with that, the Emergency Government began to rapidly lose ground. Many soldiers in the shrinking Auxiliary Army of the Emergency Government defected to the People’s Coast or deserted entirely, starting bandit gangs of their own. Others joined the cartels. But enough remained to carry on the mission of re-uniting Brazil again, but not under a communist flag. In the aftermath of the Solar Storm of 2026, entire fields were lit on fire and computer systems failed. Radiation began to leak out of several military-controlled bunkers, and the last of the Emergency Government fled to Rio de Janeiro. 

As of 2027, the civil war is reaching its conclusion, with the siege of Rio de Janeiro entering its 2nd month. 
Peru

Official name: Republic of Peru/República del Perú (until 1988), Popular Republic of Peru/República Popular del Perú (1988-1991), Brazilian Governorship of Peru/Governo Brasileiro do Peru (1991-2014), Argentine Mandate of Peru/Mandato Argentino del Perú (2017-2025)
Capital: Lima (until 2011), Huancayo (2011-2027)
Government Type: Presidential Republic (1974-1988), Far Left Military Junta (1988-1991), Military Occupation (1991-2025)
Population as of final census conducted: 68,149,568 (Circa 2010)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 38,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $329.78 Million USD	
Primary Language: Peruvian Spanish/Español Peruano
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: World Prosperity Alliance (until 1991)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

After the signing of the Shanghai Accords, both China and the United States worked together to negotiate with Alvarado to end his dictatorship, and lead them away from communism. Alvarado resisted this idea, and frequently lambasted both President Nixon and Chairman Chen. But as news of the wealth and prosperity from the outside world trickled in, he began to lose a grip on his power. On October 12th, 1974, Alvarado was deposed in a coup orchestrated by supporters of former president Fernando Belaúnde. Over the next five months, Peru was returned to civilian rule. 

Belaúnde won the 1975 Presidency in a landslide, and worked closely with both the United States and China to integrate Peru into this new prosperous world. This resulted in Peru and China signing a lucrative mineral deal in 1976, which helped revitalize the Peruvian economy. Using the United Nations Anti-Drug Task Force, Peru began to round up and arrest suspected leftists. 

This only further emboldened the remaining leftists, and in 1980, Fernando Ibáñez del Castillo won the presidency, campaigning on a harsh stance against the Shining Path and the growing crime rate. In 1981, after signing a treaty of mutual defense and joining the World Prosperity Alliance, China would send members of their Anti-Maoist Insurgency Corps to help Peru tackle the Shining Path. In 1985, Alberto Cisneros Valverde would win the Presidency, and while he was just as tough on drugs and Maoists as his two predecessors, he also wanted to turn Peru into a shining beacon of capitalism and international cooperation. He took out huge loans from the United States, the European Union, China, the IMF and even Brazil to begin gargantuan construction projects. Three massive skyscrapers were planned, and a massive expansion of Lima into the sea using man-made islands was also drafted up, though it never made it past the drawing board. The world's largest football stadium was also being built outside of Lima. 

Despite the promise of lucrative job opportunities and massive monuments that would surely place Peru as the Eighth Wonder of the World, poor planning and countless setbacks led to construction to begin in late 1987, rapidly increasing inflation and finally creating an economic depression in May of 1988. When the nukes dropped in the Middle East, only the football stadium had started construction. 

None of the mega projects would ever be completed, as Peru’s government would violently collapse on July 3rd, 1988, with the Shining Path guerillas taking over. This new government was far more radical than even Alvarado’s administration, and throughout 1988 and 1989 the Popular Republic of Peru engaged in a series of widespread land reforms. Corporations were nationalized, banks became owned by the state, and the richest people in the country were killed and lynched by mobs. Many in Peru were at first fine with this new government, as they blamed Valverde for their rapid decline in living standards. But when the Glorious Path of Peru, referred to by many as simply “the New Shining Path”, started picking off their more moderate opposition in addition to the rich, people began to second guess their faith in this new regime. The GPP began to cut rations as a result, letting only their most fanatical and loyal members receive the best food available. 

Even that would not last, as the Hot Summer of 1990 caused widespread famine and crop failure. In March of 1990, the GPP fractured into a dozen smaller groups, each with their own idea on how to bring communism to Peru. The country then descended into a brutal and chaotic civil war, with almost 23 groups at one point. August 12th, 1991 marked the end of this conflict, as the newly formed Second Empire of Brazil quickly invaded and pacified Peru. Those that had survived the cataclysmic civil war actually welcomed the Brazilians with open arms, and many of Valverde’s government who had escaped the purges voluntarily collaborated with Brazil, leading to their official annexation on January 5th, 1992. 

Through strict rationing and intensive agriculture, Peru managed to avoid any major famines throughout the rest of the 1990s. Brazil would invest heavily in mining operations throughout the 1990s, trying to get the last precious metals in the region. The Red Hand slowly infiltrated the various occupied territories of Brazil, and Peru was no exception, though they had to tone down their operations significantly due to how the public remembered the Glorious Path. 

Brazilian-occupied Peru remained relatively stable throughout the 1990s, with the first signs of trouble appearing in the 21st Century when forest fires destroyed hundreds of farms in 2001. Pollution and tainted ground water from Brazil’s mining operations also led to a major famine in 2002, and on July 9th, 2002, the Red Hand’s diversionary uprising would occur in Peru. This forced Brazil to crack down hard on Peru, removing what little autonomy they had left. Throughout the 2000s, less and less land was able to be used for farming, and as a result, cartels began to exploit the unemployed. Peru was the site of a massive Bromista smuggling operation by The Cartel, and the Panamanian Syndicate also had some dealings there. A group of former Glorious Path guerillas, forced to turn to banditry to survive, became known as the Red Column cartel and frequently fought the other two cartels for control of Peru’s coast. 

The Red Column’s influence only grew after March 1st, 2009, when the last Brazilian mining operation shut down. The three cartels had used abandoned mine shafts as safehouses to smuggle their goods into Brazil, and now they practically had free reign over the Peruvian part of the Andes. It would soon turn out to be not the blessing as they had hoped it would be, as throughout 2010 and 2011 severe storms would force Brazil to abandon the coast of Peru, relocating the capital to Huancayo. The ruins of the Belaúnde Football Stadium were swallowed up by the raging sea. The Panamanian Syndicate abandoned their operations when Lima flooded, and The Cartel followed suit in 2012, leaving the Red Column as the main criminal force in Peru. The Red Column and the Red Hand frequently fought each other, vying for control of the region. 

During the Brazilian Civil War, Peru remained loyal to Brazil, until on January 21st, 2014 their governor was assassinated by Red Hand insurgents. Civil war engulfed Peru yet again, this time between pro-Brazilian collaborators, Red Hand guerillas, and various cartels including the Red Column. This civil war was not as chaotic as the last one, thankfully, as the Great Heat Waves of 2015 and 2016 caused a temporary, unspoken truce between the factions. In 2017, Argentina began to help supply the Red Hand guerillas and their Peruvian cell. The Red Column was wiped out by the Sons of the Amazon in 2018, and by 2020, all of the pro-Brazilian forces had either been killed or retreated into Brazil itself, where they joined César’s forces. In the 2020s, the civil war had changed to the Argentine-backed Red Hand of Peru fighting a splinter faction of the Sons of the Amazon and numerous bandits. The Second Great Heatwaves of 2023 and 2024 finally forced Argentina to withdraw their support. The Solar Storm of 2026 caused major communication blackouts across Peru, leading to major gains by the cartels. 

By 2027, Peru has collapsed into warlordism and anarchy. 
Bolivia

(Flag credit)
Official name: Republic of Bolivia/República de Bolivia (1985-1990), Bolivian State/Estado Boliviano (North, 1990-1992), Bolivian Governorship/Governação Boliviana (North, 1992-2017), People’s Republic of Bolivia/República Popular de Bolivia (South, 1990-2001), Autonomous People’s Republic of Bolivia/República Popular Autónoma de Bolivia (North: 2017-2027, South: 2001-2027)
Capital: Sucre (1985-1990, South: 1990-2027), La Paz (North: 1990-2027)
Government Type: Presidential Republic (1985-1990), Far Right Authoritarian Dictatorship (North, 1990-1992), Military Occupation (North, 1992-2017), Far Left Military Junta (South, 1990-2001), Autonomous Republic of Argentina (North: 2017-2027, South: 2001-2027)
Population as of final census conducted: 22,423,731 (Circa 2020)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 23,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $45.98 Million USD
Primary Language: Bolivian Spanish/Español Boliviano
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES (South)
Alignment: World Prosperity Alliance (until 1988), COMECON (south, 1994-2001) 
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Bolivia was quite possibly the least stable nation after the signing of the Shanghai Accords. 

The Banzer Coup proceeded, and oil and metal exports dramatically went up. Banzer was then pressured by President Morgan to hold elections, and after finally caving to pressure from the West, Bolivia held their first elections in 1978. The MNR maintained a slim majority, and throughout the 1980s, Bolivia slipped further into anarchy as a second military coup, this time by the Communist party who contested the election results. The Communist Party ruled for only a single month and three days before the MNR took back the country in a counter-coup, and all the high-ranking members of the Communist Party were executed. In early 1981, the FSB Party, a Bolivian far-right socialist party, believed that the rather moderate (in comparison) MNR wasn’t doing enough. 

With the help of President Morgan, Banzer then took back power and formed a big-tent alliance party called the Nationalist Democratic Action party. Once they had taken back power though, the alliance quickly dissolved and members of the Socialist Party maintained control of the government for exactly two weeks. They were kicked out by the Christian Democrat Party, which had gotten a large amount of support in Sucre and ruled all the way to March 25th, 1982, when Banzer himself took a hold of the MNR once again and forced his way back into power. 

Bolivia was clearly in a political mess, and so on April 4th, 1982, the United Nations was forced to intervene and created the Bolivian Mandate until a stable government could be created. The US, Canada, and Europe all worked together to design a more comprehensive system of government for Bolivia, one with many checks and balances but still streamlined enough to be a good market for this new age of free trade. The Provisional Government of the Bolivian Mandate gradually opened up their markets, and to help speed up the transition, they took out huge loans to stimulate the economy. 

The first truly free elections were held on July 6th, 1985, and Eduardo Arce Villarroel of the MNR became president, holding a large enough majority to where other parties couldn’t contest the results. Bolivia’s history of frequent coups did not project an image of stability, and as such, many companies did not do business with Bolivia. President Villarroel was forced to take out larger and larger loans just to keep the country functioning, and by 1988 Bolivia was considered one of the poorest nations in the world. 

After the Crash of 1988, the UN Peacekeepers were recalled to their respective countries and Bolivia immediately collapsed into civil war yet again. President Villaroel was assassinated on October 17th, 1988, and with no clear political successor, Bolivia descended into utter anarchy by the start of 1989. 

The Hot Summer of 1990 actually ended the civil war, as the factions could no longer fight each other and could only focus on maintaining the territory they already held. In the North, which was being supported by Brazil, they formed the far-right Bolivian State, and in the South, the far-left People’s Republic of Bolivia. The two Bolivias kept to themselves for the most part, as the aftereffects of the Hot Summer demanded all their attention, though there was never an official end to the fighting. Skirmishes along their border continued, and when Brazil reformed into the Second Empire of Brazil, they signed a treaty of mutual defense with the north, only to promptly invade it after their dictator died under mysterious circumstances. 

From 1992-1995, the Bolivian Governorship and Brazil attempted to wipe out the socialists in the South, but could never breach their strongholds in the Andean mountains. The socialists held out, but their stockpiles were running dangerously low and the agricultural potential of the Andeans were limited to say the least, so on June 22nd, 1996, Argentina and the People’s Republic of Bolivia signed a secret treaty, where the Bolivians would provide Argentina with precious metals and coal in exchange for food and weapons. Later in 1997, South Bolivia would join the Alliance of Nations. 

On May 20th, 2001, South Bolivia signed the Treaty of Patagonia, and joined the Democratic People’s Republic of Argentina as an Autonomous Republic. China, working together with Argentina, engaged in widespread mining operations in the Bolivian region of the Andes. By the time China left in 2007, the side effects of their operations became clear across the republic, wells reported contamination and pollution, leading to major droughts and an outbreak of cholera in 2008. The weakened population was then ravaged by the Red Flu, leaving almost 4 million to die between 2007 and 2009. 

Throughout the 2010s, Argentina had to invest heavily to keep Bolivia functioning. Bolivia’s farms suffered from chronic famine, and the Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016 crippled their agriculture entirely. The Bolivian State, which had been fiercely loyal to Brazil, finally crumbled in the aftermath of the heat waves and was absorbed by the southern republic, with the help of Argentina. The northern regions had not had their ground water polluted on the same level as the southern mountain regions, and so as Argentina began to organize irrigation systems, the republic began to slowly recover. Things were still bad though, as drought and water contamination remained a massive problem in the 2020s, leading to Argentina gradually scaling back their support. The Solar Flare of 2026 caused widespread drought and extreme water shortages, leading to several water riots in December of 2026. 

By 2027, Bolivia remains the most unstable republic of Argentina, teetering on the brink of collapse and routinely being invaded by cartels and remnants of Brazil’s military. 
Paraguay

(Flag credit)
Official name: Republic of Paraguay/República del Paraguay (until 1999), Autonomous People’s Republic of Paraguay/República Popular Autónoma del Paraguay (2000-2027)
Capital: Asunción
Government Type: Authoritarian Far Right Military Dictatorship (until 1994), Federal Republic (1994-1999), Autonomous Republic of Argentina (2000-2027) 
Population as of final census conducted: 12,210,755 (Circa 2020) 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 13,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $5.584 Billion USD
Primary Language: Paraguayan Spanish/Español Paraguayo
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES (until 2000)
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (until 1994), COMECON (1998-2000)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial 

Paraguay maintained a good relationship with Brazil and the United States during the Glorious Decades. Alfredo Stroessner remained open to the free trade that came with the Shanghai Accords, and thus became as industrialized as Mexico. Throughout the 1980s, Stroessner worked with the UNADTF to hunt down and capture suspected leftists, who were then forced to work in Paraguay’s many factories. Stroessner removed many safety laws and regulations, and Paraguay became the most dangerous country to work in, aside from China. Cancer rates in Paraguay were the highest in all of Latin America, and despite the rampant repealing of laws, Paraguay was still not the richest country in Latin America. 

In the mid 1980s, Paraguay was forced to rely on foreign aid to feed their unemployed (which numbered in below 1 million, a massive amount for the Glorious Decades) and to take out loans to subsidize many local industries. Throughout the 1980s, Paraguay had the highest income inequality in the world, even worse than China, as the top 1% were some of the richest people in the world while it was estimated at least three Paraguayans starved to death every day. 

After the Crash of 1988, all the overseas corporations vanished from Paraguay. Due to a treaty that President King signed with President Stroessner, the US was required to provide aid until King left office. Brazil’s President de Alencar had also signed a similar treaty, and the two countries did their best to keep Paraguay afloat. But the crime rate and unemployment skyrocketed, and when President Graves announced that he would withdraw all federal and industrial aid to Paraguay, the government almost collapsed and was forced to declare martial law across much of the country. Part of President Franco’s policies included reducing aid to other Latin American nations, as he said that Paraguay had a growing trade deficit with Brazil. 

In the end though, Paraguay would be the last nation to receive aid from Brazil, as President Franco didn’t want to have a repeat of the “Argentine mistake”. Medicine and canned food that could have been used to help the poor in the slums of Brazil’s cities instead went to Asunción where they were usually hoarded by those who had been tasked with distributing it. 

On August 10th, 1989, Alfredo Stroessner suffered a stroke and was pronounced dead a few days later. The military took over the country, and kept it on a tight leash. Argentina, which had been doing the best in Latin America by this point, offered to send supplies and slyly claimed that Brazil was stifling them. Paraguay resisted until the Hot Summer of 1990, when almost 100,000 died from starvation and malnutrition-related illnesses. The aid from Brazil was drying up, and soon some military governors demanded that Paraguay accept Argentine aid. In the places where the military refused, protests broke out and almost 350 people were killed in riots until Argentine shipments finally arrived. 

This caused relations with Brazil to sour, until finally, in late 1991 Brazil invaded Paraguay. This started the Paraguayan War, and Argentina would soon intervene after one of their diplomats was reportedly killed in the crossfire outside of the Battle of Caaguazú. Argentina was slow to mobilize, as at one point Brazil came close to fully taking over Paraguay. The military junta, which had gone through three leaders by this point, was gradually becoming more and more left wing as they began to work closely with Argentina. Paraguayan partisans overwhelmed Brazilian troops while Argentine artillery destroyed convoys and supply lines. Later on in 1993, Chile joined the fight on the side of Paraguay, though they only sent a small token force of less than 1000 troops. 

The war ended with the Battle of Salto del Guairá, as a joint Paraguayan-Argentine-Chilean victory. Much of Paraguay was left in ruins due to Brazil’s scorched earth tactics and routine bombing. Vast stretches of Cordillera were now no-man’s land, covered in ash and ghost towns. Almost 2/3rds of the factories built during the 1970s and 1980s were destroyed beyond repair, and over two million people were missing or presumed dead. 

Paraguay was reformed from a military dictatorship to a federal republic, though the military still retained a marginal degree of control - Coronel Esteban Duarte Caballero of the Paraguayan Restorative Party won the Presidency after being considered a war hero for his work in the Battle of Salto del Guairá. President Caballero worked closely with Argentina’s President Falcón to rebuild Paraguay, with an emphasis on fortifying their border with Brazil and preventing further conflict. Much of the Brazilian-Paraguayan border was mined in the late 1990s, and on April 3rd, 1997, the Federal Republic of Paraguay signed a treaty of mutual defense with the People’s Republic of Bolivia. Later that year, in July, Paraguay would join the Alliance of Nations. 

Due to Paraguay’s economy in the Glorious Decades being mainly focused on international manufacturing and later black market trade, their agricultural sector was quite minimal. When the country began to plan out reconstruction efforts, they made deals with Argentina to manufacture weapons and industrial equipment, using Bolivian metals, in exchange for food. 

In 1999, Capitán Alejandro Benítez Rojas of the Paraguayan Socialist Party won the presidency, and part of his campaign included creating even closer ties with Argentina, South Bolivia, and Chile. These talks would lead to the Treaty of Patagonia, and on November 12th, 2000, Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay would join the Democratic People’s Republic of Argentina as their own autonomous republics, with South Bolivia signing the next year. 

Throughout the 2000s, Argentina would build lots of factories across Paraguay, as since they had the smallest amount of arable land, industry was concentrated there and shipped via sea or train to other parts of the Patagonian Alliance. Power rationing went into effect in 2012. Famine and unemployment began to slowly subside, though rationing became harsh during 2003 and 2011, and vegetarianism was enforced in 2013. Water rationing was also implemented in 2015. Due to the highly concentrated nature of Paraguay’s population, being all crammed in heavily fortified cities, it was particularly susceptible to the Red Flu, which wiped out an estimated 670,000 people from 2008-2011. 

In the areas of Paraguay that were impractical for industrial parks, training grounds and military bases were established instead. The Autonomous People’s Republic of Paraguay had the second-largest military in the Patagonian alliance, behind Argentina. Many that survived the Brazilian invasion in the 1990s would become high-ranking and respected members of the Paraguayan armed forces, commanding bases along the border. 

During the Brazilian Civil War, Paraguay would repel several incursions throughout the 2010s. By the 2020s, Paraguay’s largest problem would end up being the distribution of clean water, leading to several riots until desalination plants in Argentina and Uruguay began to increase the supply of water. Heatwaves also became more prominent, with an order in 2023 mandating all non-essential work be conducted during the night. In 2025, as Argentina began to colonize West Antarctica, many unemployed Paraguayans were resettled in the colony of Nueva Asunción where they would set up farms in the fresh, fertile lands. This exodus has led to a slight increase in criminal activity and reports of cartels trying to move in, though the Paraguayan military is constantly policing the region to combat this. The Solar Storm of 2026 would force the Paraguayan military to retreat from the border and set up defensive lines a kilometer back. 

By 2027, almost a quarter of Paraguay’s population has been relocated to Antarctica, and the Paraguayan Army is gearing up along with the rest of the Patagonian Alliance to wipe out the last remnants of Fascist Brazil and prevent them from using their nuclear weapons. 
Chile

Official name: Republic of Chile/República de Chile (1984-1990), Socialist Republic of Chile/República Socialista de Chile (1990-2000), Autonomous People’s Republic of Chile/República Popular Autónoma de Chile (2000-2027)
Capital: Santiago 
Government Type: Authoritarian Republic (1984-1990), Far Left Junta (1990-2000), Autonomous Republic of Argentina (2000-2027)
Population as of final census conducted: 41,197,488 (Circa 2020)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 42,000,000 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $27.678 Billion USD
Primary Language: Chilean Spanish/Español Chileno
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES (until 2000)
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (until 1990), COMECON (1990-2000)
Great Death Survival Rating: Remnant 

The signing of the Shanghai Accords not only limited how China could intervene in East Asia, but it also limited how the United States could intervene in the Americas. President Nixon was forced, begrudgingly, to tone down the US’s operations in Chile after March of 1972. While the US could not overly influence the politics of Chile or support any coup attempts (though given how the Guatemalan trials ended up not punishing the US, they could have gotten away with it) instead they pressured the international community to heavily restrict trade and lending to Chile. 

Living conditions in Chile began to sharply decline, with only Cuba and the USSR providing support for Salvador Allende’s government. The US wouldn’t have to wait long however, as Augusto Pinochet overthrew Allende on September 11th, 1973. The Nixon administration eventually began the process of gradually lifting the sanctions placed against Chile, hoping that once Pinochet’s regime had stabilized it could prove to be a lucrative market. The Morgan administration, meanwhile, reversed Nixon’s relaxed sanctions and pressured Chile to return to a democracy, as Morgan believed that only a democratic government would allow for a proper free market of ideas and products. 

Chile proved to be rather resistant to change, as Pinochet held on to power. Trade deals and international summits throughout the early 1980s finally led to Pinochet relinquishing power and holding free elections in 1984. By sheer coincidence, a coalition of conservative, right-wing politicians, many of whom were in Pinochet’s cabinet, were elected, and José Toribio Merino won the Presidency. Pinochet was given the title of “Executive Advisor” and pardoned of all his human rights violations from his rule. 

When Franklin King became President, he heavily promoted the idea that Chile was a stable market, and for the most part, it was true: While Chile was still technically a democracy, its citizens had very little actual political power and most of their civil liberties were in regards to taxations and buying things. President Merino repealed many labor laws and made unionizing illegal, and labor rights activists were routinely arrested for “drug running” and sent to UNADTF prisons or state-run penal factories. 

The authoritarian government heavily suppressed any news of the economic collapse during the Crash of 1988, and simply told citizens to continue on business as usual and that anyone caught claiming that there were economic problems was actually a cartel member and would be punished accordingly. They could not punish everyone though, and as companies began to shut down factories and lay off workers in record numbers, the news spread far faster than the government could suppress it. The federal elections in December, 1988 led to Camila Andrade Fuentes, a center-left socialist, gaining widespread support. Yet despite the overwhelming numbers of people voting for her, Merino mysteriously won again in a landslide. 

It was clear that the conservative majority had rigged the election, and this spiraled into full-blown civil war by January. Support from Castro and Voronin soon put Pinochet’s faction on the defensive, and the siege of Santiago finally ended on January 19th, 1990 during the Hot Summer. Cuban advisors then helped turn Chile into a fully socialist state, and held mass trials and executed Pinochet, Merino, and 37 others by hanging on April 14th, 1990. Due to Chile’s already cool climate and high altitude, famines and drought weren’t much of an issue during the 1990s. Chile would make an alliance with Argentina and join the Paraguayan War in 1993, though they could not spare many soldiers as they were still rebuilding and recovering from their civil war. Some Cubans, fearing the rising temperatures back home, stayed in Chile and eventually became citizens there. Chile joined the Alliance of Nations in 1996. 

Throughout the late 1990s, Chile’s navy would patrol their coasts to discourage any cartels from landing. Smuggling remained a problem into the 2000s, though eventually it became clear that Chile was not a good market for selling drugs due to their history under Pinochet. On November 12th, 2000, during Chairwoman Fuentes’s second term, Chile signed the Treaty of Patagonia and became an autonomous republic of Argentina. China would attempt to set up mining operations from 2001-2005, but gave up due to extreme weather. Many of the low-lying cities were abandoned in the late 2000s, with some citizens refusing to relocate and instead becoming nomadic “boat people” who traveled along the coast in huge convoys of barges. Overfishing and spillover from the Glorious Decades led to several large famines in the 2010s, with Argentina being forced to supplement Chile’s food supplies in order to prevent mass famines and possibly an uprising. 

Argentina took a special interest in Chile, as with a majority of the Andes in their two nations, they both had access to many precious minerals. As climate change got worse, the highland peaks remained quite cool, and snow fell on the highest points all the way until 2017. This caused a drought in both Chile and Argentina, but Chile felt it far stronger. Much of lowland Chile was declared inhospitable in 2020 due to excessive flooding, and Argentina began resettling many Chileans into the plains in Argentina and later, Antarctica. Vertical settlements began to be built in the Andes all the way back in the mid 1990s, and by the 2020s that was where the remaining population lives as they mine away for precious metals, and supposedly, uranium. 

After the Great Heatwaves of 2024 and 2025, President Roca, seeing the writing on the wall, began constructing many secret bunkers along the Andean mountains. These bunkers were stockpiled with enough rations to keep 100 people fed for over 25 years, advanced munitions and weapons to help rebuild civilization, and most importantly, books, technical manuals and knowledge. These locations were powered by nuclear reactors and could withstand three direct hits from a warhead twice the size of Brazil’s supposed nuclear weapons. 

By 2027, the Chilean Autonomous Region, despite being frequently beset with extreme weather, is actually a pretty chill place to live. Careful allocation of resources has kept the remaining soil mostly pollutant free and mining steady. 
Uruguay

(Flag credit)
Official name: Oriental Republic of Uruguay/República Oriental del Uruguay (until 1991), Democratic Republic of Uruguay/República Democrática del Uruguay (1991-2000), Autonomous People’s Republic of Uruguay/República Popular Autónoma del Uruguay (2000-2027)
Capital: Montevideo
Government Type: Minarchist Government (until 1991), Far-Left Authoritarian Republic (1991-2000), Autonomous Republic of Argentina (2000-2027)
Population as of final census conducted: 6,500,562 (Circa 2020)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 7,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.04 Trillion USD
Primary Language: Rioplatense Spanish/Rioplatense Español
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES (until 2000)
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (until 1991), COMECON (1994-2000)
Great Death Survival Rating: Remnant 

During the Glorious Decades, Uruguay would end up being an experiment in prototyping the ideal post free trade country. Far-left guerrilla movements were suppressed and fizzled out by the early 1970s, and as a result the military did not feel the need to intervene. The authoritarian but civilian regime worked closely with the United States to catch any leftists and create a truly free market. 

On June 27th, 1973, Juan María Bordaberry launched a coup against the government to turn it into a military regime, claiming that the civilian government wasn’t doing enough to help the economy or deal with the rampant leftists. But as economies around the world began to skyrocket, by 1974 this military government was seen as obsolete and throughout the coming years, Bordaberry would step down and his replacement, Martín Ezequiel Ferraro, renewed ties with the United States. 

In 1977, the Uruguayan experiment truly began. Modeling themselves after many of Morgan’s decisions regarding budgeting and privatization, President Ferraro began to sell off many government functions and social services. Ferraro believed that Morgan wasn’t going far enough, though: it wasn’t just the fat that should be trimmed, but as much of the government as possible must be privatized in order for a true free market to emerge. 

Public education was privatized, with the intent being that corporations would provide education for their employee’s children as a part of their benefits, and thus make the industry more competitive. Many worker’s rights were also repealed, as if a worker didn’t like working at one particular company, they could simply leave and work for someone else who treated him better. Regulations in food and other safety measures were also no longer enforced, as if a company cut corners and caused food to be contaminated and kill several thousand people, it would spread through word of mouth and that company would become bankrupt. Taxes were made so small that they were practically non-existent. To make the country more attractive for foreign investors, the government began selling out key positions and policies to the highest bidder. For example, Aurora Capital e Participações, a Brazilian financial group, bought out the public transportation policy in Punta del Este and replaced the city’s fleet of buses with ones made by a Chinese manufacturing company that the group had invested in. 

By the 1980s, almost all of Uruguay was privatized, with the miniscule government only providing security, and even then, most of that was being given to contractors. Uruguay’s military had been turned into a PMC, and their police force had been turned into an army of rent-a-cops. Uruguay became a tax haven like no other, and many companies initially moved their headquarters to Montevideo just for that reason alone. But with the repealing of so many laws and the shaky enforcement of the few that remained, many things that were illegal in other countries became legal in Uruguay. Corporate espionage, money laundering, copyright infringement: pretty much all of it was legal unless it involved someone actually dying. Many of the drug lords in the 1980s would have lavish mansions in Uruguay where they would turn their dirty money into clean US cash, and suspected terrorists could walk around freely as long as they had enough bills on hand. Prostitution ran rampant, with tourists disappearing every day and vanishing into trafficking rings. 

This rapid change of economic policy did little to address the inflation and income inequality that the average Uruguayan faced. Due to the extremely flexible laws regarding crime, drug running, smuggling and other criminal activity, Uruguay became the country with the highest crime rates. The black market created almost 20% of Uruguay’s GDP, and the grey market even larger. Some criminal businesses actually got licenses and were “legitimized”: as long as they paid their minimal taxes, and weren’t causing any international incidents or wars, they were fine with whatever. 

In 1984, President Morgan was no longer impressed, but alarmed. He described Uruguay as not a free market, but total anarchy. A lack of minimum wage had led to many workers being paid in food, food that was stale or rotting, leading to workers to die and more importantly, not contribute back to the economy. Companies stealing other corporation’s secrets destroyed the very concept of a competitive market. Even Chairman Chen was disappointed with how the Uruguayan experiment was turning out. 

Throughout President King’s term, he pushed hard on using the UNADTF to help police and regulate Uruguay. The Uruguayan government (now essentially a coalition of corporate CEOs and mob bosses) actually only stepped in when over a hundred drug labs went on strike and demanded better pay and working conditions, with some of them even unionizing. The corporate security began to actively police against strikers, unionists and other labor advocates, which were becoming more prominent in the late 1980s. Meanwhile, the UNADTF began to provide legitimate security as peacekeepers and police officers, serving as Uruguay’s unofficial law enforcement. 

The Crash of 1988 hit Uruguay hard. Overnight, hundreds of companies relocated to their native countries, and as the UNADTF was recalled to their countries of origin, law enforcement began to seriously break down. Soon, just about everyone was poor, and in July of 1988 what was left of the government had been taken over by an organized crime syndicate based out of Montevideo, hoarding what little food was left for them and their guards. 

Many in Uruguay had had enough though, and began to organize to fight back and take back their country. Brazil desperately tried to prevent a left-wing uprising and thus sent aid to Uruguay’s “government”, propping them up even more. In response, Cuba started to covertly send supplies to Uruguay’s underground. Few of the supplies actually reached their intended destination, as bandits and other organized crime syndicates bartered the supplies for luxury goods. 

By 1989, much of Uruguay outside of Montevideo was total anarchy. Brazil and Argentina kept a close watch on their borders, as bandits and refugees frequently tried to cross over. President Franco was criticized for supporting such a barbarous regime, but he calmly stated the alternative was communism. Famines and food scarcity in 1989 led to an estimated 150,000 deaths, with the UN trying to pass an emergency resolution to intervene and provide aid, but no country was willing by this point. Cartels started to form and ironically provided the most stable employment in the country, and continued that way into 1990 until both Argentina and Brazil took a harsh stance against the criminal activity going into their borders, with President Franco finally withdrawing aid. 

The Hot Summer of 1990 caused things to finally collapse, as Montevideo exploded into a violent revolt that ended with the Legislative Palace of Uruguay being completely destroyed and burned to the ground, and almost a hundred hanged from nooses. This became known as the Uruguayan Revolution of 1990, with the USSR, Cuba and later Argentina offering congratulations. Camilo Pereyra, a former liaison to the UNADTF turned revolutionary, was declared the leader of this interim government in Montevideo. An alliance was made with Argentina, and their Gendarmería Nacional worked with the Oriental Revolutionaries to stabilize the rest of the country. Many factories and sites of industry were destroyed in retaliation, being seen as the survivors as methods of exploitation. 

Uruguay rapidly transformed into a left-wing republic, being headed by Chancellor Pereyra, and throughout 1990 and 1991 the government engaged in massive land reform programs and wealth redistribution. The vast hoard of stolen Cuban and Brazilian food was rationed out, and anything left over from the Uruguayan experiment was burned for catharsis. Some factories were kept, as they were retooled by Cuban engineers to produce essential goods that would increase the quality of life for their citizens, though the factories frequently ran into technical problems and were finally shut down by the mid 2000s. As a result, the Democratic Republic of Uruguay became very agrarian and began to experiment with irrigation to increase crop yield. 

This dramatic transition alarmed Brazil, and Morales cited it as one of the reasons why Brazil needed to become harshly anti-communist once again. Argentina began to trade surplus industrial equipment to Uruguay in exchange for some of their food, and ties between the two of them grew closer. Bandits and cartels still inhabited the fringes of Uruguay, and the overstretched and under-equipped partisans could not hope to stop them all. In 1995, after the end of the Paraguayan war, Argentina and Uruguay signed another treaty and Argentina began to provide additional security for Uruguay (especially along the Brazilian border) in exchange for a greater amount of harvested crops. Uruguay was also one of the initial nations to sign the new Alliance of Nations charter. 

In the late 1990s, Chancellor Diego Andrés Larrosa Bentancur, hoping to maintain their close ties with Argentina, participated in the talks that would lead to the signing of the Treaty of Patagonia. Uruguay became an autonomous republic within Argentina, and in the 2000s, Argentine troops swarmed the Brazilian border. Argentina began to invest in military bases in the north of Uruguay and also rebuilt many of Uruguay’s cities, as the ruins left were particularly susceptible to flooding and forest fires. Montevideo was restored in the mid 2000s (though in a distinctly brutalist style to use a minimal amount of resources) and shipyards began to be built along the coast. 

In the regions where agriculture was not practical, factories were constructed, though great care was taken to make them in isolated places so as to not invoke memories of the Glorious Decades. These factories only made replacement parts to keep Uruguay’s military and farm equipment up and running, and rarely produced anything else. 

On August 1st, 2014, the Patagonian Alliance launched an invasion into weakened Brazil through Uruguay, taking over the former states of Rio Grande Do Sul and Santa Catarina. Their campaign was put on hold when the Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016 caused Uruguay and Argentina’s crop yield to dramatically decline, forcing extreme rationing across the alliance. Argentina decided to not pursue further conquest at the moment, though the two former states were added to Uruguay’s territory. 

In the 2020s, controlling the newly acquired Brazilian states would prove to be a challenging task for Uruguay’s government. Decades of anti-communist propaganda led to guerrilla warfare and rebellion, with farms being destroyed throughout the 2020s. The two occupied states, known as the Uruguayan frontier, became a hotbed for cartel activity and discontent. Rations were reduced every year in an attempt to control the population but the cartel’s numbers only grew in response. That was until the Second Great Heatwave of 2023 and 2024, when famine and drought finally made many of the former Brazilians give in and stop fighting back. Those with good behavior were given better living conditions, and as the citizens became more accepting of this new way of life, resistance finally died down by late 2026. 

By 2027, Uruguay is in a unique situation, as while they do not have much in the way of industry or military, they are one of the biggest producers of food in the Patagonian Alliance. Uruguayan farmers are in charge of the agricultural efforts taking place in the newly colonized Argentine Antarctic lands.  


Propaganda poster for the Argentine Communist Party, circa 2015
Argentina

(Flag credit)
Official name: Argentine Republic/República Argentina (until 2001), Democratic People’s Republic of Argentina/República Popular Democrática de Argentina (2001-2027), Emergency Provisional Regime of Argentina/Régimen Provisional de Emergencia de Argentina (2028-2036)
Capital: Buenos Aires (until 2027), Santa Roca (2028-2036)
Government Type: Presidential Republic (until 2027), Far Left Military Junta (2028-2036)
Population as of final census conducted: 94,178,752 (Circa 2020), 176,511,288 (including Autonomous Republics)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 93,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $142.386 Billion USD
Primary Language: Rioplatense Spanish/Rioplatense Español
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES
Alignment: None (until 1993), COMECON (1993-2027)
Great Death Survival Rating: Remnant 

Argentina was one of the more isolated nations during the Glorious Decades, cut off from the major powers of the world and for the most part, unaligned. Argentina championed the Non-Aligned Movement, along with Yugoslavia and India, and later nations such as South Korea, Taiwan and Cuba. That was not to say they did not participate in the lucrative free trade that came with the Shanghai Accords, only that Argentina was not a member of any particular trading bloc. 

Juan Perón, aware of the changing political landscape around the world, voluntarily stayed in Spain for the rest of 1973 and moved to France in 1974, where he suffered a heart attack in Paris on March 7th, 1974. He was able to be treated immediately, and was prescribed a life-saving medical treatment for his other health conditions. When he had recovered, he contacted President Héctor José Cámpora and told him he was returning to Argentina. This was kept secret, as the Montoneros had recently attempted to assassinate José Ignacio Rucci and both Cámpora and Perón worried that violence could result from announcing his return. 

Perón finally returned in a surprise visit on June 20th, 1974. President Cámpora pardoned him and stepped down, calling a snap election. Perón was elected in a landslide, and resumed office for the third time on July 1st, 1974. Argentina’s economy rapidly rose, and without any oil shortages, it never came crashing down. Throughout the 1970s, Argentina was one of the few countries to target far-right groups instead of far-left ones. Perón, worried about rumors of him being aligned with fascists and escaped Nazis in the 1950s, began a special military operation to dismantle the Triple-A. While Perón did not succeed at wiping out and destroying the organization, he did make radical groups on either side of the political spectrum seem less attractive. The Montoneros actually disbanded on January 27th, 1978, and the Triple-A would dissolve in 1983. 

Juan Perón died on February 10th, 1979, at age 83. His wife and vice president, Isabel Perón, succeeded him as the 41st President of Argentina. Having worked with her husband for almost five years as his vice president, she went in knowing much more about politics than IOTL. on February 28th, 1979. She was not as loved as her husband, but still a respected president until she suffered a stroke on July 8th, 1982 and retired from public view. 

Her vice president, Raúl Alfonsín, was sworn in on August 19th, 1982 as her official replacement. He had a more conservative, right-leaning version of Perónism. It was under Alfonsín that Argentina officially joined the Non-Aligned Movement, and several trade deals were made with both Yugoslavia and India to help modernize and update Argentina’s industry. Throughout the rest of the 1980s, both the USA and USSR tried to woo Argentina to their side of the political spectrum, as some could describe Argentina’s economic system as being split straight down the middle between capitalism and communism, as Perón had implemented many social programs in the 1970s but still promoted free trade. 

Argentina wasn’t hit particularly hard by the Crash of 1988, as they were not completely dependent on foreign trade and also had a large amount of natural gas and oil. Argentina was still entering a crisis like the rest of the world though, for them, it was just slightly slower. Carlos Vicente Luis won the Presidency in 1988, campaigning on a platform of far-left Perónism and Latin American unity in this time of hardship. Petroleum began to be rationed in June of 1989, and after witnessing the chaos of the Hot Summer of 1990, President Luis enacted the initially controversial decision of passing even more left-wing policies such as nationalizing the remaining companies in the country and also creating a food ration for the unemployed. 

Argentina was so far south that the climate barely changed throughout the 1990s, and their main problem was rampant economic problems, a rising crime rate, and an almost endless flood of refugees from their northern neighbors. President Luis, trying to maintain some level of trade, began sending aid to Paraguay and Uruguay. Due to the exponentially decreasing stability of nations worldwide, especially in places like Colombia, Venezuela and Brazil, Argentina put their tiny military on standby. Throughout 1990 and 1991, President Luis ran a harsh and heavy-handed recruitment campaign for both the armed forces and law enforcement. Many joined simply for the pay, and while it took a few years for corruption to be weeded out, Argentina managed to keep their unemployment rate at a relatively small level compared to their neighbors. 

For the rest of 1990, Argentina worked with Uruguay to bring order to their countryside. Argentina was expecting an invasion from Brazil, who was struggling to maintain their government’s legitimacy. Argentina would be completely blindsided when Brazil instead invaded Paraguay on December 15th, 1991. President Luis, still hoping for Latin American unity and cooperation, sent a diplomat to mediate a peace between Paraguay and Brazil. Lucía Fernández del Valle managed to organize several talks throughout early 1992, but on March 25th, 1992 she was killed outside of Caaguazú. 

This was seen as a call to arms, and a record number of citizens enlisted during the spring of 1992. Industrial sites began to be retooled to produce weapons and equipment for the war effort, and the government started to parrot propaganda portraying Argentina as one of the few sane nations left, a beacon of rationality in this world going crazy. Nationalism and patriotism could only rise, and Argentina wholeheartedly joined the Paraguayan War on June 2nd, 1992, with almost 150,000 troops arriving to break the Siege of Asunción, overwhelming and defeating the Brazilians. 

President Luis called upon all of Latin America to rise up against Brazil and unite against their imperialism, but not many countries answered the call. Cuba sent several shipments of weapons, and Chile later sent a small force of only 1000 troops. Paraguay and Argentina resisted Brazil and were soon on the offensive, taking back more land every day. 

On May 15th, 1994, Brazil’s forces were finally defeated during the Battle of Salto del Guairá and the Argentine-Chilean-Paraguayan alliance declared victory. The victory of Argentina and Paraguay over a much larger and stronger country like Brazil was a huge morale boost. Any who held doubts about the way  Argentina was going were no longer questioning if this left-wing Perónism was good for the nation. Minister Voronin congratulated Argentina, and the USSR invited them to join COMECON, which they accepted. 

In the 1994 federal elections, Alfredo José Falcón of the United Peronist Party of Justice won the presidency, riding on the high of victory and promising closer ties with Argentina’s neighbors against Brazil’s aggression. Falcón was an even bigger supporter of socialism than Luis, and created policies like permanent rent freezes and protecting worker’s rights. 

Throughout the mid 1990s, President Falcón worked closely with Chile, Uruguay, Paraguay and South Bolivia to create a united front against Brazil. This resulted in the Treaty of Asunción on September 4th, 1994, the Punta Arenas Accords on February 22nd, 1995, the Treaty of Montevideo on June 25th, 1995 and the Treaty of Challapata on November 28th, 1996. Part of these treaties revitalized trade between these five nations, with Argentina usually supplying food, industrial equipment and security in exchange for labor, raw materials and energy. Industrialization projects helped rebuild South Bolivia and Paraguay while providing work for millions. Argentina, under President Falcón, was also one of the nations to sign the initial Alliance of Nations charter on June 11th, 1995. 

President Falcón also engaged in talks of federalizing the five nations into one, similar to what the European Union was doing. These talks, headed by Chancellor Bentancur of Uruguay and President Falcón led to the reforming of the various treaties into one unifying document: the Treaty of Patagonia. 

The wealth and prosperity that Argentina was experiencing (at least compared to the rest of the world) created monumental support for left-wing politics, throughout 1999 the openly-communist José Lorenzo Ramos of the Argentine Worker’s Party campaigned on turning Argentina and the rest of Patagonia into one nation, as only together could they survive the 21st Century. He said that both Falcón and Luis didn’t go far enough, and advocated for a communist democracy. Ramos won the Presidency on October 24th, 2000. Many in the nation were still cautious about becoming communist, but those against it never did anything more than whine. On November 12th, 2000, Argentina, Chile, Uruguay and Paraguay signed the Treaty of Patagonia and Argentina officially became the Democratic People’s Republic of Argentina, with Chile, Uruguay and Paraguay as autonomous self-governed republics that were integrated into Argentina’s economy, rail lines, and military. Bolivia joined slightly later, on May 20th, 2001. When the nation was finally formed, their population was 144 million across the five republics. 

President Ramos cautiously worked with China from 2001-2007, mainly to extract coal from Chile and Bolivia as Argentina’s natural gas was running out and their petroleum had been exhausted by 1995. In May 2005, a massive tropical storm forced China to abandon their mining operations in Chile, and soon after, President Ramos ordered much of the Chilean lowlands to be abandoned. The Red Summer of 2003 caused minor famines throughout the republics, and the Minister of Economy created a program to maximize the calorie output in citizen’s food. This resulted in the sun tortilla, a large flat, tasteless tortilla made from wheat, maize and soybeans and fortified with several minerals, plus chemicals and preservatives to make them last longer. For most of the more impoverished workers in the autonomous republics, this became their main staple food. 

Strikes and power outages in 2004 led to civil unrest, and the Argentine government, struggling with maintaining a rusting prison system, instead created a prisoner work program where criminals could work off their sentence in various ways, such as farming, collecting trash, or if they were deemed especially gifted, they were educated in the remaining public universities by trained volunteers. More violent criminals were given a single chance to join the military in special penal battalions that patrolled the borders of Brazil and Peru, or be executed on the spot. South Bolivia was known for frequently using their penal battalions to launch raids into the Bolivian State, to various success. Unlike similar programs in the United States, Europe, China, the USSR, and even Brazil, some criminals actually managed to work off their sentences. Crime still gradually increased, and the law enforcement agencies of the five republics in turn became more militarized to keep up. 

President Ramos was re-elected in 2006, and emphasized on modernizing Argentina’s military. Ramos actually sent envoys to Central Europe to negotiate with the fracturing Warsaw Pact to buy their old military equipment. Argentina managed to get a few outdated submarines in exchange for Argentine soybeans and tortillas. Later on, after various bureaucrats reported water pollution, ties with China were officially severed and Argentina became even closer with the USSR. Researchers with the Chilean Ministry of Health also concluded that China had been unknowingly spreading the Red Flu through their supply lines and shipments from the mainland. This forced Argentina to implement quarantine measures in major population centers such as Sucre, Buenos Aires and Montevideo until 2010. 

Ramos also knew that Brazil would come back to finish what they started in Paraguay and Bolivia, and despite the Patagonian Alliance having a much better trained and supplied military than they did in the 90s, Brazil was still much bigger. In early 2006, Argentine intelligence began to hear rumors of an uprising in Guyane. Ramos, viewing this group as a potential ally against Brazil, finally had agents make contact with the Red Hand in mid 2007. Argentine supplies, ferried by submarine and dropped off in the dead of night, kept the Red Hand and the Laotian resistance fighting for years. Members of Argentina’s intelligence agency and the Red Hand eventually established the short-lived alliance with The Cartel in Colombia, carrying out the October 10th Uprising. President Ramos was not expecting The Cartel and the Red Hand to maintain close ties for anything longer than a year, so the betrayal was completely expected and actually factored into Argentina’s war plans. Brokering alliances with other cartels were also considered, but was decided to be a waste of resources. Using Polish and Soviet submarines, Argentina continued to supply the Red Hand in Colombia. 

In the Purple Summer of 2011, Ramos became less worried about Brazil invading Argentina as famines were starting to weaken Morales’s grip on his subjects. He began to plot with the Red Hand to bring about the complete destabilization of Brazil, and while Ramos was not able to finalize the details during his term, the Red Hand carried out their plan on May 20th, 2013. Soon after, Brazil was plunged into civil war. 

The Purple Summer began to put a strain on Argentina’s resources, with some sub-species of grapes and other fruits going extinct. Alcohol, while not outright prohibited, was tightly controlled and prioritized for sanitation as opposed to for recreational use. Meat began to be banned by several local governments to free up more land for growing food for humans.

Roberto Horacio Fernández, Ramos’s successor, worked on forming even closer ties with the USSR and also modernizing Argentina’s failing energy grid. Argentina spent thousands of hours and millions of pesos researching nuclear, solar, and wind energy, and relentlessly pressured the USSR to help collaborate with them. In January of 2013, Voronin finally relented and sent five Soviet physicists to help push Argentina in the right direction. The physicists would end up staying permanently, as the onset of the Brazilian Civil War and Voronin’s death in 2015 caused the Soviet government to abandon them. The scientists ended up not wanting to return to the USSR. They found that while Argentina had significantly less food and extreme weather was becoming a weekly problem, their government was significantly less oppressive than the Soviet Union’s. 

Fernández, at the request of Ramos, was strongly urged to remain at full alert along the Brazilian border as the civil war kicked off. President Fernández was far less cautious than Ramos, and was eager to strike Brazil first. The Secretaries of Uruguay, Bolivia and Paraguay all agreed with this, and Chile was neutral. On August 1st, 2014, Fernández finally launched an invasion into Brazil through Uruguay. By December, the Patagonian Alliance had taken two former states and parts of North Bolivia, when the Great Heatwave of 2015 caused a dramatic decrease in crop yield and even drought in some areas. President Fernández was forced to halt the operations in mid April of 2015, with the invasion force being reassigned to help maintain order. Rebel groups, usually supported by cartels, were blaming the communist government for the food shortages in 2015. This turned to protests, and later strikes, and parts of Bolivia and Paraguay were facing civil war and maybe even succession. 

The opposition was largely wiped out by 2016, though famines continued into 2017 with an estimated 25 million deaths due to starvation, drought, disease or civil unrest. Heatwaves caused even more to faint, and many regions switched to working at night. Vegetarianism was made mandatory across the nation, with buying and possessing meat deemed illegal except on certain holidays such as Christmas, Caraval, Easter, Patagonia Day (May 20th) and Independence Day. Citizens could register in waitlists with their local municipal slaughterhouse for their cut in advance, while supplies lasted. 

With this law put into effect, agricultural stockpiles saw a gradual increase as pastures for livestock were turned into intensive maize farms. There were some who still traded in meat, and some more ruthless people dug up corpses and sold the meat on the black market, marketing it as “Carne Criolla”. A special squadron of the Argentine law enforcement, based out of Buenos Aires, specialized in dismantling illegal meat rings with an emphasis on brutally executing any human meat traffickers as a warning to any who might sell their grandma for a quick peso. Argentina’s intelligence agency, learning the information from the Soviets in late 2014, knew what the majority of Brazil, Mexico, the USA, Europe, and China was actually eating, and the decision to make vegetarianism mandatory was to help make it easier to spot cannibals. Overfishing in Chile was also cited as one of the reasons to switch to vegetarianism. 

On December 1st, 2017, after having recovered from the Great Heatwaves, Argentina cautiously renewed their war against Brazil and launched an invasion on North Bolivia. North Bolivia was completely crippled, and became the territory of Bolivia, though they were not granted any autonomy and were kept under strict control. The two states that Argentina had taken from Brazil were also given to Uruguay. 

Also starting in February of 2017, and continuing until the second Great Heat Wave of 2023, Argentina began supplying Peruvian communists in their struggle against cartel-backed factions. Support was steady, but minimal. Grain and cereal based rations were sent along with weapons and ammunition, and carefully calculated so that only the regions bordering Bolivia could be reliably defended and held - if the Peruvians tried to extend too far, they’d inevitably run into supply line issues and be forced to retreat to their border with Bolivia. Other Peruvian factions of course continued the fight, but Argentina ensured that a small sub-group of the Peruvian Red Hand served as a proxy to keep cartels from invading Bolivia through Peru. In the 2020s, rations were gradually decreased until 2023 when only weapons were shipped into Peru. 

President Fernández established the “Counter-Fascism” Protocol, which was the government name for the program of supplying the Red Hand throughout South America and using them as a proxy to keep Brazil and the dozens of cartels distracted and disorganized. Special care was to give their main branch in Venezuela the lion’s share of the aid, including technical manuals, moth-balled artillery from the 20th century, and even some agents and tacticians to advise the guerrillas in New Caracas. After Brazil was kicked out of Venezuela and until the early 2020s, when Venezuela’s coast was still relatively safe from pirates and cartel raids, Argentina openly unloaded their supplies from rusted cargo ships onto ramshackle docks and piers. After 2022 though, the northern Brazilian coast and the places formerly known as Guyana, Guyane and Suriname were all crawling with cartels and bandits, who frequently launched raids to plunder Argentina’s life-saving cargo. In March 2022, the decision was made to supply the Red Hand only by night and via water-proof dead drops deployed by submarines. The Red Hand faction in Venezuela was the last guerilla group the Argentines supplied, with their last shipment arriving in January of 2027. 

President Fernández went down in history as a controversial figure. Some claimed his methods at restoring order were too harsh. Many cited his state-enforced vegetarianism policy. Many called him a warmonger. Marina Santiago Roca became the second female president of Argentina in 2018, the 47th president of Argentina, and also most notably, the last democratically elected president of Argentina. 

Roca at first campaigned on a hopeful recovery of the hardships in the mid 2010s, with promises of bringing Argentina’s nuclear power grid to fruition. She also campaigned on expanding women’s rights, such as making abortion protected by the constitution and birth control widely available. This did not have the effect she had hoped though, and was forced to make a controversial two-child policy in early 2020. 

President Roca would be the one to flip the switch on Argentina’s first functional nuclear power plant on July 11th, 2019, located in Chasico. For their help, the Soviet physicists were given luxury apartments in Rosario. This was followed by building a power plant outside of each of the capital cities, and several more along Argentina’s coast to eventually power desalination plants. 

President Roca, in one of her first days in office, would expand the Fernández Protocol to include the Brazilian branch of the Red Hand. This was met with threats of impeachment, though she managed to convince her cabinet that it was in Argentina’s best interest. Pacifying Brazil’s coastline by supplying the coastal communes would provide safe passage for supplies to Venezuela, and even Colombia if Argentina got that bold. More importantly, it provided a way to keep citizens employed and in factories, and not aimlessly wandering around, unemployed and easy targets for cartels and drug runners. Deteriorating climate conditions, famine and cartel activity forced Argentina to begin escorting their shipments in mid 2019, and by 2021, had switched entirely to dead drops much like how they would for Venezuela. Only the most dirty, low-grade left over bits of plants were used for rations for Brazil, but beggars couldn’t be choosers. Argentina then transitioned to sending more weapons than food, to help provoke fighting against hostile factions. 

Due to the worsening climate and the aftereffects of China’s industrial experiments, the northern republics of Paraguay and Bolivia were starting to become more and more costly to maintain, with the government of Argentina considering removing them from the Treaty. However, a group of surveyors in the Falkland Islands reported that in the past forty years, Antarctica had been melting at an unprecedented rate, with almost half of the west Antarctic ice sheet melting in the 21st century alone. By 2030 it was estimated that all of West Antarctica would be open to human settlement. At the moment, much of the Antarctic Peninsula south into parts of Ellsworth Land was already free of ice year round. 

This is when President Roca began the Antarctic Resettlement Program, and from 2021-2024 almost 10 million people from Paraguay and Bolivia were sent over to colonize this new fertile land in the name of the Argentine people. Later on, people from Chile and Uruguay voluntarily relocated to Argentine Antarctica to help coordinate the colonization efforts. The soil was initially harsh and rocky but the Argentines had all the space they could want. 

President Roca viewed Antarctica as Argentina’s saving grace. This fertile new land could save not just Bolivia and Paraguay, but also possibly their allies in Venezuela. President Roca had toyed with the idea of making Venezuela the sixth republic in the Patagonian Alliance, but it remained a pipe dream. As both her and her predecessor knew, the Red Hand were only useful for as long as they were drawing attention away from Argentina. 

In early 2024, President Roca reluctantly expanded the Fernández Protocol to include supplying guerillas in Ecuador to battle against the remnants of Brazil. This would prove remarkably tricky, as the weapons and materials rarely made it to the rebel bases located beyond the Ecuadoran Andes. Only three operations were ever successful, the rest of them being attacked and waylaid by pirates, cartels, bandits, or remnants of Brazil’s military. President Roca would withdraw support for Ecuador in November 2024, though intelligence was shared with the Red Hand in Peru regarding supply line issues. 

President Roca won reelection in 2024, using the Antarctic colony as a propaganda piece. The Great Heatwaves of 2024 and 2025 were what made President Roca realize that even Argentina and the rest of Patagonia might not survive the climate apocalypse. Chronic heatwaves had made nocturnal work shifts required by law since 2023, and even with the growing nuclear power grid, frequent brown outs caused many to die in the heat, and water was rationed starting in late 2024. 

But 2024 and 2025 proved to be an entirely different beast. 

Massive forest fires and drought in Uruguay crippled ration stockpiles, hurricanes destroyed two nuclear power plants, requiring several technicians to sacrifice themselves to prevent a meltdown, and incursions from Brazil into Bolivia forced a mass mobilization of reserve troops. Human meat rings were popping up at an alarming rate, and people falling into Bromista-induced comas became worryingly common. Buenos Aires was flooded with one meter of water for a month, with President Roca temporarily relocated to an undisclosed bunker in Puerto Santa Cruz. Cartels and pirates began to raid coastal towns that were cut off from communications, and the five secretaries were almost at each other's throats. Martial law was declared, and the Treaty of Patagonia was almost nullified. The penal programs that had been established earlier in the 21st century were replaced by simply shooting criminals. Argentina was unraveling. 

It was only the threat of Brazil that was keeping the nations together, and so to put a metaphorical bandaid on their problems, President Roca began the construction of a fortified border wall across Paraguay, Uruguay and Brazil’s border. In a controversial move, she also restarted the Fernández Protocol with a focus on sending not just supplies but also troops to the coastal communes in Brazil. Vanguard shock troops from Bolivia and Paraguay were sent to the coastal cities, with the express goal of goading the Brazilians into fighting as many of the fascists as possible. Operations to retake supply depots from cartels always turned out to be Pyrrhic victories. The vanguard troops were also told to seek out any information about the supposed nuclear bomb the Brazilian military remnants frequently boasted about.  

But this was all simply to buy time. 

President Roca knew that the world was changing for the worse, and soon Argentina could crumble. Plans were drafted to eventually evacuate everyone above the Tropic of Capricorn by 2030, and to dismantle Brazil’s nuclear weapons so that they wouldn’t have to constantly watch their backs. This was the best case scenario though, and so she also plotted a secret contingency plan. Bunkers began to be constructed in the Andean mountains and using the guise of censorship, the government began to collect technical manuals and surviving literature to store in these vaults of knowledge. These bunkers would house important scientists, politicians and engineers, along with their families and a squad of special forces to guard them. They could wait out the inevitable nuclear war and collapse of civilization and rule over the survivors as their architects, guardians, and jailors. 

The other members of the Patagonian Alliance were not told of these bunkers, though the Chileans suspected something was happening. Shipments of rations began vanishing across the Patagonian Alliance, and radioactive water began to mysteriously leak into the ocean off Chile’s coast. The last state-run newspaper was shut down and its printing press vanished. Training exercises, officially for the “Brazilian Pacification”, were carried out across Argentina. President Roca never returned to Buenos Aires, instead hopping in between the capital of the Antarctic Colony (Santa Roca, named after her) and Puerto Santa Cruz. 

In March of 2026, President Roca would host the final Alliance of Nations summit on the topic of potentially resettling humanity to Antarctica. This was President Roca’s last, desperate gesture to restore her own faith in humanity. As an olive branch, she invited the last remaining stable nations to discuss a partition of Antarctica. Many nations had already been making contingency plans for when the last remnants of civilization collapsed, and if they banded together and worked hard, they could remake the splendor of the Glorious Decades in this new Antarctic Eden. 

None would agree with her though. The United States and the European Federation both demanded exclusive rights to any oil found there, the USSR would only agree as long as Supreme Secretary Savateev was the sole head of state for this new multinational community, and East Germany refused to have any part of the plan if the USSR was included. The only country that seemed remotely interested in cooperating was Japan, but they claimed that they would need additional resources from Argentina in order to properly resettle. The Nordic Union, Switzerland, and the Union of Australia and New Zealand all remained neutral and refused to participate in this “polar folly”. 

The negotiations went nowhere, with President Roca leaving her humanity at the conference table. 

On November 1st, 2026, President Roca would launch an invasion of Brazil yet again, this time focused on encircling Rio de Janeiro (the last stronghold of Brazil’s fascist dictatorship) and wiping them out. Information regarding Brazil’s nuclear weapons was also a priority, but like many of Argentina’s military operations after the second Great Heat Wave of 2023 and 2024, it was in actuality a diversion. The 4-million strong invasion force, which amounted to nothing more than cannon fodder, was meant to draw attention away from Antarctica and the contingency bunkers in the Andes. 

Cities began to be slowly emptied out. Important scientists, engineers and mechanics were covertly escorted to various bunkers along the Andes. Curfews and martial law had become permanent across the nation, and succession groups were popping up in Chile and Uruguay, forcing more troops to be diverted. The five Soviet scientists were taken to a bunker underneath Cerro Norte, supposedly for their own protection but in actuality they were taken as hostages to prevent the Soviets from potentially attacking the Argentine mainland. 

Argentina was not devastated like other countries after the November 3, 2026 solar flare. Emergency technicians were sent to make sure nothing was damaged in the bunkers, and the decision to use only hard copies of files instead of computers ended up being a saving grace for not just Argentina, but humanity as a whole. Drought and wildfires burned almost half of Uruguay to a crisp, and desalination plants were being worked around the clock to minimize deaths from dehydration. The navigation and radar systems for all of Argentina’s navy became inoperable due to the EMP, and operations for the Brazilian Pacification had to be significantly scaled back. The Red Hand was essentially abandoned, as when Argentina’s communication grid was gradually restored, the regiments in Antarctica reported that they had been attacked by an unknown hostile force and that the garrison had been overrun. Satellites were completely fried, and after a week, an outpost in the Falkland Islands finally confirmed it was not cartel members, like many in the Argentine government had expected, but actually a country that had been largely neutral to Argentina: the Union of Australia and New Zealand. 

Argentina switched to a full war-time economy with all the remaining operational factories churning out guns, ammunition, and uniforms. The Patagonian military swelled to almost 35 million troops. Special Forces and elite battalions, ones that had been lying in reserve to protect the network of bunkers, were drafted up to fight against the Australian incursions. President Roca, worried about the holdings in Antarctica, diverted almost half of Argentina’s remaining functional military equipment and engaged in a break neck campaign to retake Antarctica. 

Information out of Antarctica was scarce, but battalions of tanks and reconnaissance blimps were spotted rolling across the Pensacola Mountains. Australian troops were estimated to be between 15,000 and 45,000, and were expected to reach Santa Roca by mid January, 2027. It was here that President Roca, now colder than lost winter, considered using Argentina’s emergency arsenal of nuclear weapons in a preemptive strike against Australia. The operational status of Argentina’s nukes were unknown. 

As of 2027, Argentina is teetering on the brink of total collapse, as the Treaty of Patagonia is slowly becoming just a piece of paper. Diversionary troops are being sacrificed by the millions in Peru and Brazil, with the rest of the Alliance becoming fractured police states. The Argentine-Australian War for Antarctica is rapidly turning into a war of survival. President Roca is no longer questioning if, but rather when the nukes finally fly, be it Argentina, Australia, or Brazil who launches them first. 

Section 3: Island Nations
Cuba

Official name: Republic of Cuba
Capital: Havana (until 2002), Camagüey 
Government Type: Authoritarian Socialist Republic
Population as of final census conducted: 22,190,622 (Circa 2010)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: Unknown, speculated to be less than 500
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.7459 Million USD	
Primary Language: Cuban Spanish
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES
Alignment: Unaligned (1979-1988), COMECON (1988-2014)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

Antigua and Barbuda

Official name: Antigua and Barbuda (until 1990), State of Antigua (1990-1992)
Capital: Saint John’s 
Government Type: Constitutional Monarchy (until 1990), 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Dominican Republic 

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

The Bahamas

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Barbados

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Dominica

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Grenada

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Haiti

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Jamaica

(Flag credit)
Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Saint Christopher-Nevis-Anguilla

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Saint Lucia

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 

Trinidad

Official name: 
Capital: 
Government Type: 
Population as of final census conducted: 
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 
GDP as of June 7, 1988: 
Primary Language: 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: 
Alignment: 
Great Death Survival Rating: 


Interlude
Four Horsemen
Section 1: Neutral Arab States
Excerpt from "The World Obituary: Nations of the World during The Black Ages", by Dr. Alaric Themiston Heliodor, Prof. Marek Stęcrowicz Orionis, Dr. Aryasatya Pramodhyantara, and Dr. Eirikson Valehart. Great Lakes Press, Second Edition. Originally published in 967 ASJ, edited 973 ASJ


https://youtu.be/4j0O1CLtMsg?si=DU7N87-whaUk8H3K 
Algeria

Official name: Zakat Republic of Algeria (until 1989), Algerian State (1989-2009)
Capital: Algiers
Government Type: Presidential Republic (until 1989), Authoritarian Dictatorship (1989-2009)
Population as of final census conducted: 58,512,345 (circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 36,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $560.7 Billion USD
Primary Language: Algerian Arabic/Dziria
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Mediterranean Economic Alliance (until 1989)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Negotiations between France and the newly independent Algeria resulted in a young, but healthy democracy. The military of Algeria, riding high on the war of independence, decided to cancel a coup at the last minute, and as the Glorious Decades continued on, Algeria became a model of pre-Crash liberal democracy. Instead of opting for a full on civil war, Houari Boumédiène, leader of the FLN, chose subtler routes to gaining power. For the most part, Algeria continued down its socialist path, and the FLN manipulated things from behind the scenes. Coercion, bribery, and blackmail happened in just the right amount to tip things in the FLN’s favor while also keeping plausible deniability. While Algeria remained very democratic on paper, in practice it was incredibly corrupt, as corruption, infighting and smuggling led to many infrastructure and public works projects to fall through. 

This all changed in 1972, when Algeria signed the Shanghai Accords. China and the European Union began importing their oil in record numbers, and soon the corrupt politicians in Algeria realized they could make far more money selling oil, minerals and metal than by making shady business deals and smuggling construction equipment across Africa. China in particular made Algeria very rich, as they imported several million tons of gold, silver, zinc, and lead between 1972-1988. Pipelines were constructed to transport oil and natural gas from Algeria to Europe, with the Almeria-Beni Saf Pipeline opening in 1973, the Caligari-Annaba Pipeline in 1975, and the Trans-Mediterranean Pipeline opening in 1979, which transported oil directly to several cities in France and Italy. 

This made Algeria extremely, fabulously rich, and living standards skyrocketed. A single month’s salary for working at an oil refinery could pay for a new luxury car, and miners were compensated even more, with some of them becoming millionaires. The bickering between the two factions in the government simmered as everyone enjoyed the wealth and prosperity. Things were getting so good in fact, that in 1982, a socialist president was elected without so much of an eyebrow raised from the FLN. President Karim Belhadj, seeing what the rest of the Arab world was doing at the time, decided to expand living conditions and make an extensive welfare state. Funds were given to religious organizations, artists, bankers, grocers, pretty much anyone who asked for money, got it. Tourist traps sprung up all along the coast. Opulent and intricate sculptures were built in every city, and so much artwork was produced that a museum dedicated entirely to artwork produced during this era was opened in Algiers, called the Belhadj Memorial Museum. Mosques became extravagant temples that began to rival Mecca, and every imam had a limousine. 

President Belhadj was also remembered as the man who organized the “Oath of Brotherhood”, a conference held over several months in 1983. The conference, which invited many religious leaders from around the country, provided an open forum for religious sects to come together and discuss their differences with civility. While not every religious faction was able to make peace (such as the Twelver Shias, for example), a vast majority of them were. The Algerian Holy Parliament was created, which served as a way for religious leaders to discuss how to tackle political matters. One representative was elected to be the “Oathkeeper”, who would serve in the President’s Cabinet and advise him in religious matters. Many in the religious fringes tried to paint President Belhadj as an infidel, but this was disproven when he officially renamed Algeria to the Zakat Republic of Algeria - Zakat being the islamic concept of giving to charity, referring to the extensive welfare state. While the state remained openly secular, the religious in Algeria experienced a revival in islamic art, poetry, and even film. The Noor Cinema Festival, an annual film festival that featured Muslim-directed films, was held in Algiers two times: One in 1985 and another in 1987. 

While Algeria had joined the League for Arab Cooperation in the 1980s, they still remained closely aligned with Europe, China, and America during the Glorious Decades. As such, they did not provide any military aid for their brothers in Egypt and Iraq. As the Sinai Crisis spiraled out of control, President Belhadj urged everyone to keep a cool head, as he stated that “everyone on this Earth are brothers, and we should treat our family with love”. This fell on deaf ears to the delegates in Iraq, Egypt, and Israel. Algeria even offered to host negotiations in April of 1988. 

When the bombs dropped, because of their neutrality, Algeria was spared from any direct attacks. The Crash of 1988 heavily affected the welfare state of Algeria, as the price of oil rising meant fewer states could afford their products. Pro-Egypt Islamic Nationalists, who believed that President Belhadj was a hypocrite and should have intervened on the side of the Arab world, started bombing pipelines going into Europe. This was followed by a Chinese tanker being sabotaged and scuttled in the Mediterranean, spilling almost 100,000 tons of chemically-enhanced lead into the sea. After the EU stopped buying Algerian energy for “national security” reasons, and China stopped importing Algerian minerals, the carefully constructed zakat state began to rapidly unravel. Members of the nascent Qatifism movement targeted and destroyed mosques that were deemed “too opulent”, and then targeted the mansions of wealthy religious leaders. A bomb almost going off at the Holy Parliament Building in Algiers caused the Islamic Congress to be suspended indefinitely before being dismantled in 1990. 

By the end of August 1988, President Belhadj was the most hated man in Algeria. Many accusations were tossed around: lack of faith, corruption, and even treason. Belhadj was impeached on September 1, 1988, and while he avoided the death penalty, he was exiled from the country. Supposedly, he fled to Iran to help the Islamic Socialist movement there, but reports instead state that he died of lung complications in France in 2002. 

This led to the Algerian Crisis of 1988, where due to political infighting and civil unrest, the ruling coalition fragmented. After several months, the hundreds of candidates had boiled down to three: a famous footballer running on a platform of vague populism, the President of the Assembly, running on a platform of islamic nationalism, and the General of the Armed Forces, who ran on a platform of stability and self-reliance. Despite the low turnout, the votes took over 2 weeks to count, and the winner was the footballer. 

This caused General Mourad Ben Salah to stage an FLN-supported coup, and executed the footballer on live television on January 5, 1989. Martial law was declared, and the welfare state was heavily cut back to only the bare minimum. Rationing was enforced, and while it was claimed to be temporary, it was never lifted. Just like the rationing, General Ben Salah claimed that his dictatorship was temporary, and that it was only until the country was stable again. Radiation and smoke spreading from the ruins of the Middle East drifted across south Algeria, and checkpoints were set up along the border to catch refugees fleeing from the cataclysmic civil wars. Programs of self-reliance were established, with a large-scale reindustrialization program starting in 1990. 

General Ben Salah also destroyed much of the signs of opulence from the Glorious Decades, with the motto of “equalizing everything through poverty”. He was actually true to his word - the gold-plated mosques were broken down and their gold used for electronics, and the many luxury cars were broken down for parts. The General never hoarded these items for himself or his men, he drove the same austere vehicles as everyone else and executed those found hoarding. 

This mass shift away from consumer products and the smoke in the air actually caused Algeria to survive the Hot Summer of 1990 with minimal casualties, as more people died from smoke exposure than from drought or heat. Huge recycling factories were built on the edges of the Sahara. Intensive farms were set up in the fertile northern mountains, and while nobody was eating five-course meals, nobody starved either. 

Algeria seemed to actually be on the path to recovery. Housing projects, recycling drives, and intensive farms kept everyone more or less employed, and for a while, it appeared that things were getting better. Algeria even joined the Alliance of Nations in 1995, and signed several trade deals with European countries and later the Federation in the 1990s. Algeria also allied itself with Morocco, forming the Pact of Gribaltar. 

Behind the scenes, things were slipping. Increasingly devastating droughts in the southern provinces had required more and more water to be sent in. Reports of religious militants also dominated the news cycle in the mid 1990s, and caused further delays on water shipments. 

This culminated in a massive drought in June of 1996, forcing almost 90% of the population to flee to the northern cities along the coast. Overcrowding, resource shortages, religious extremism, and ethnic tension all grew until it spiraled out of control, escalating from violence and riots to a full on civil war. The Governor of Laghouat, the Imam of Qacentina, the acting General of the Armed Forces, and the “martyr of Sahara” all vied for control. The sands became stained with blood as increasingly horrific battles were fought across the quickly collapsing state, which by 2000 was no more. The civil war ended without a victor, just several dozen statelets that fell to famine and drought. 

The closest thing to a “victor” in this civil war was the city of Algiers, which renamed itself as the “People’s Government of Algeria”. The city-state, led by General Ben Salah’s former Minister of the Interior, started out with good intentions, but after the Red Summer was effectively little more than a puppet state for the Federation to siphon out the last remaining easily-accessable resources in Algeria. After the city flooded in 2009, it was never rebuilt, and the Mayor/General/President was hanged by a lamppost. 

Throughout the 2010s, the anarchy spread, with refugees fleeing from the Middle East to try to get into the Federation, unaware of their borders being closed for over a decade. These groups organized based on ethnicity, country of origin, and religion, and eventually organized into a very loose confederacy to prevent further incursions, as if saying “fuck you, I got mine”. Spanish and Italian refugees, fleeing from the purges in the Federation, settled in the north-western regions of Algeria, forming militaristic warlord states that constantly waged war with the Constantine Confederacy. 

The Great Heat Waves of 2015 and 2016 cripped what little civilization there was even further. Warlords waged war over wells and pumps, while a huge fleet tried to sail across the sea and land in France. They were massacred by the European Navy, and those that survived returned to a land devastated by drought and famine. Flooding and salinization ruined the coast. By 2017, reports of cannibalism were widespread, as survivors devoured those who had fallen from the heat. 

In 2018, a Spanish warlord managed to unite much of north-west Algeria, creating a feudal state organized along ethnic lines, before being killed by his lieutenant during the Second Great Heat Wave of 2023. Massive droughts caused many to die of dehydration and the warlords to fight amongst themselves. 

In the aftermath of the Second Great Heat Wave, those in the Constantine Confederacy had a low enough population that cannibalism was kept to a minimum. Tribes of raiders and scavengers fought over the ruins of Algeria and Tunisia, and farmers battled the encroaching Sahara to grow sickly, diseased potatoes. Some survivors had constructed crude, barely-functional desalination tanks that they guarded with ancient guns, quickly creating a water-based economy. 

This lasted until the Solar Flare of 2026, where the makeshift desalination plants broke down and were unable to be restored. The loose alliance that had united the survivors in the Constantine hills broke apart, and ironically, became more chaotic and violent than the feudal realms of the warlords. 

By 2027, the Constantine Water War slugs on, while millions of serfs are ground under the heel of a dozen warlords. Very few remember the country that existed here just 30 years ago. 
Tunisia

Official name: Zakat Republic of Tunisia (until 1989), State of Tunisia (1989-2002), Republic of Tunisia (1989-2002, disputed), Revolutionary Tunisia (1989-2011, disputed)
Capital: Tunis (de jure after 1989), Tripoli (de facto after 1989)
Government Type: Left-wing Dictatorship (until 1989), Government in Exile (1989-2002), Liberal Democracy (1989-2002, disputed), Authoritarian Dictatorship (1989-2011, disputed)
Population as of final census conducted: 23,083,270 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 6,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $11.1 Billion USD
Primary Language: Tunisian Arabic/Tūnsi 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: COMECON (until 1989)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial


In the 1970s, the loosely socialist aligned dictatorship threw their lot in with the Soviet Union. Despite remaining extremely repressive, Habib Bourguiba decided that Chen’s China was a betrayal of the working party, and this earned them many brownie points with the USSR. Secretary Agassi frequently visited Tunisia, and throughout the 1970s, Tunisia was one of the more prosperous countries in the Second World. 

Following Poland’s example, Tunisia opened up and finally signed the Shanghai Accords in 1981. A large service and information technology opened up, with Tunis becoming the “call center capital for Europe”. Tunisia remained closely aligned with the Soviet Union, and prioritized them over their Arab brothers. In 1982, Bourguiba declined allowing the PLO to base their headquarters in Tunis. Instead, Egypt became their staunchest supporters (of humanitarian aid, at the time). 

Tunisia officially renamed itself to a Zakat Republic in 1983, despite already championing Arab Socialism. The third Triumvirate of the Soviet Union stopped trying to convince them down the path of full-on communism, and deemed the Zakat system to be “close enough”. Tunisia competed with Algeria in selling their energy to Europe, but never came close, with only a singular pipeline being constructed - the Marsala-Tunis Pipeline. Tunisia also developed a growing tourism industry, with mainly Soviet tourists visiting. After the Concord of Moscow, many Soviet citizens became fascinated with the Star Wars trilogy, with some visiting the filming locations in Tunisia and recreating scenes. 

In 1988, Bourguiba still refused to support the PLO and their allies in the Sinai War. After the Crash of 1988 and the rapid decline in Soviet aid (Voronin claimed that they were well on the way to communism, and Moscow would focus on other countries more “in need” of revolution), the CRD became more and more repressive. Pro-Egypt bombings never happened on the scale they did in Algeria: a major terrorist attack was thwarted by Special Agent Augusto Fernando César, his last international mission before retiring to domestic work in Brazil. This operation pacified the extremists, who instead moved on to Egypt where they followed the Grand Ayatollah in his Great Jihad. 

Tunisia became more and more of a police state, with immigration being suspended in August 1988, rationing implemented in October 1988, and a nationwide curfew being implemented in early 1989. Trade negotiations with Italy broke down, and the pipeline was shut down on the Tunisian side. Bourguiba still had many connections in Moscow, and managed to secure a deal with the Soviets. Tunisian oil was given to the Soviets for a lucrative price, in exchange for guns, ammo, and food. 

Inside the government, opposition only grew. Many compared Tunisia to the relative prosperity Algeria was experiencing, and some wanted to re-align themselves with the West and potentially receive more aid. This movement grew and grew, and on April 9, 1989, Bourguiba was deposed in a coup led by his Prime Minister, Mourad Kassar. Kassar quickly reorganized the policies of the government, such as suspending all sales of oil to the Soviets, and even lifting the rationing and curfew orders. Hundreds of services became privatized, all the government-owned companies were sold off, and generous tax incentives were made to lure in western investors. 

It seemed like a great plan, except, no one came. President Graves didn’t even send a reply to President Kassar’s half-dozen letters, promising lucrative income tax reductions for foreign investors and a willing workforce. Europe, who was quickly becoming more and more socialist, was incredibly suspicious of Kassar’s sudden change of policy. In response to this pandering, both the Soviet Union and China severed diplomatic ties with Tunisia. 

Kassar’s liberalization policies were a complete failure, and just a month later, on May 19, 1989, Kassar fled the country, taking with him anyone he deemed “worth a damn”. He ended up settling in Libya, where he claimed he was the legitimate head of state for Tunisia, governing in exile. He was killed by rebels during the 2002 Libyan Revolution, with much of his entourage killed or missing. 

This plunged the nation into a brutal civil war, with the northern half of the country becoming the “Tunesian Liberation Front”, composed of rebels who wished for a return to a Glorious Decades-era centrally planned economy. The rebels were headquartered in Bizerte, and used Soviet-supplied weapons to attack government forces. The remnants of Kassar’s government, those who didn’t flee with him, formed the “Tunesian Democratic Union”. The government forces, despite being based on liberal democracy, remained extremely oppressive and did not provide many opportunities for businesses or elections. They were located in Gabès, and constantly tried to beg the West for aid, claiming that once the rest of the country was under their control, they would hold elections. 

Both of these factions quickly turned into failed states, as the rebels fell to infighting and the government forces devolved into warlords and dictators. Many fled from Tunisia, taking boats across the sea to Italy. Tunis declared independence in 1995, and while they did not ally with the rebels, they did have a distinctly socialist government. Droughts in 1996 and heatwaves in 1997 resulted in almost half of the population dying, and a bomb going off at the last operational oil refinery caused the government forces to finally collapse. 

Tunis remained alone in a vast sea of anarchy, though the People’s President of Tunis was assassinated in 2002 around the same time as the Libyan Revolution, and throughout the 2000s, more than a dozen people held the office before being killed by conspirators or bandits. Tunis was burned to the ground in 2011 by a band of roving refugees, and increasingly hostile sandstorms devastated the countryside. Tiny, isolated communes remained, and after the Great Heat Wave of 2015, inherited the corpse of Tunisia. 

Between 2017 and 2022, many of these tiny city-states joined the Constantine Confederacy and started to share surplus food in exchange for technology. Islamic warlords and radiation-worshipping death cults from the former Middle East frequently invaded lower Tunisia, driving the survivors into the Atlas Mountain Highlands. 

After the Second Great Heat Wave, the survivors of Tunisia became even more closely intertwined with the Constantine Confederacy, and desalinated Algerian water was traded for tiny Tunisian potatoes. The Solar Flare of 2026 put an end to this, as disagreements over water allocation caused the Tunisian and Algerian sides of the Constantine Confederacy to fracture into a civil war. 

By 2027, the Constantine Water War wages on, though the Tunisian side is winning. 
Morocco

Official name: Zakat Kingdom of Morocco, Socialist Republic of Morocco (1999-2005, disputed), Moroccan Federation (2005-2009, disputed)
Capital: Rabat, Casablanca (2005-2009, disputed)
Government Type: Far-Left Constitutional Monarchy, Far Left Dictatorship (1999-2005, disputed), Federation Puppet State (2005-2009, disputed)
Population as of final census conducted: 48,504,294 (circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 38,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $281 Billion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES
Alignment: Mediterranean Economic Alliance, COMECON (1999-2005, disputed)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

After the death of King Mohammed V, Prince Moulay Abdullah ascended to the throne in 1961. His elder brother, Hassan II, was killed during the 1958 Rif Riots when his plane was shot down. Hassan II was already groomed by their father to succeed him on the throne, so King Abdullah I was initially woefully unprepared for ruling. Out of fear and anticipating further riots, he relinquished some of his power and established a constitutional monarchy modeled after the UK. A bicameral parliament is formed, with the lower house being composed of a mix of mayors of large cities and religious leaders, being called the People’s Chamber. The upper house, called the Moulay Assembly, was composed of members of the aristocracy and other high-ranking members of his father’s government, along with governors and military leaders. 

This actually worked very well, and instead of people rioting in the streets and killing each other, they instead shouted from the top of their lungs in the capitol. The Moulay Assembly always had the final say and had to approve on what the People’s Chamber proposed, but when it came down to brass tacks, they agreed on a lot of stuff. King Abdullah I had succeeded in making his job a lot easier: the people governed for him and he simply signed off on orders. In the meantime, throughout the early 1960s, he continued seeing a tutor to help him complete his studies in law. 

Tax incentives and foreign investment led to a massive phosphate boom in the late 1960s, and in 1972, Morocco signed the Shanghai Accords. Phosphate became the country’s biggest export, going to places like Brazil, France, and China. A coalition of religious leaders and social democrats, called the Zakat Party (HA), proposed using the country’s vastly increasing wealth to create a safety net for those less fortunate. This notion barely passed, appealing to the more religious members of the Moulay Assembly. Besides the loose welfare safety net, most of the government’s policies in the 1970s boiled down to building a thriving tourism industry. Morocco was one of the more popular places to visit in Africa, and to try to emulate the tropical oceanic style of their competitors in the Pacific, beach resorts opened up all along their coast. Several Spanish resort companies collaborated with Moroccan conglomerates to create “resort cities”, completely planned cities where every single building was some kind of service. The largest of these, the Tangier International Resort, was finished in 1979 and provided almost 1% of Morocco’s GDP for that year. 

Unfortunately, King Abdullah I died on October 4, 1981, from cancer-related breathing complications. His eldest son, Prince Moulay Hicham, ascended to the throne. Unlike his father, he became very invested in politics, and earned the name “The Red King” for his many left-leaning policies. King Hicham I actively participated in every legislative meeting, and became a champion of the Zakat Party. Under his rule, he officially renamed Morocco into the Zakat Kingdom of Morocco, saying that a “true king serves his people”. The Zakat Party grew significantly over the course of 1982, but then it was split in a schism: King Hicham I began proposing radical reforms and expanding women’s rights. The Conservatives in the Zakat Party split and formed the Orthodox Zakat Party (HAL), and the liberals renamed the party to the People’s Zakat Party (HAA). 

There was a massive uproar at this, and as a compromise, King Hicham I officially passed a new constitution that made his position purely ceremonial, and the new head of state was a popularly elected President, whose Prime Minister was chosen by the Parliament of Morocco. The first Presidential Election was on December 1, 1982, and Tariq Benhassan of the HAA won in a landslide. His first major policy he passed through parliament was a massive increase to education spending, with a program to provide free tuition to families who had never been to college. President Benhassan ended up being an extremely controversial figure, as the country was split almost 50/50 in their opinion of him. He was known for being one of the first countries to host the newest secretary of the Soviet Union, Gennady Yanayev, who congratulated him on his socialist policies. 

Morocco quickly became a black sheep: the Arab world was distanced by their progressive rights for women, while the communist world confused by how Morocco never became secular: in fact, President Benhassen frequently paused debates and interviews to pray on live television. Many were baffled by this: he could never be accused of being an infidel as he was extremely pious, and he could not be described as conservative because of his radical views on women’s rights. As such, while Morocco remained an observer member of the League for Arab Prosperity, they did not aid either the Israelis or the Egyptians. 

After the Sinai War went nuclear, the stock market crashed, and the Shock rippled through the economies of the world, Morocco managed to barely survive the initial aftereffects. Morocco was a very energy-hungry nation, and with the massive drop of oil supplies, electricity was the first commodity to be rationed. President Benhassen started a campaign to encourage people to minimize electricity use, with citizens encouraged to use alternative light sources during the night. Phosphate mining kept the country’s economy afloat, if unstable, and energy shortages led to setbacks and supply chain disruptions. Every year, the welfare was cut back and chiseled away, bit by bit, as the government struggled to tackle the rapidly shrinking budget. Benhassen repealed his education program in 1990, and a massive famine during the Hot Summer required Morocco to use its own phosphate and import hundreds of thousands of kg of American food, putting the government in massive debt. 

The reduction of living standards were so gradual, and the President had earned so much good will, the public continued living on as normal, if less well fed and more unemployed. He won reelection in 1990, though not by as big of a margin as he did in 1982. In 1991, many of the coastal resort cities, which had been decaying for several years now, were turned into housing for the homeless. This plan, while it had good intentions, did not end up as the President had envisioned: years of little to no maintenance had made the buildings highly unstable, and over 3,000 people were killed due to structural collapse when a massive hotel gave out. Government-provided candles meant to replace electricity use during the night time led to several large fires, with the city of Fez almost burning down in 1992. 

With so many people looking for meaning in this crisis, President Benhassen turned to an unexpected solution: he began leading the nation in daily prayer on live television. This did help the morale of the nation, and saw a dramatic reduction of secularism. Based on interviews conducted in 1993, the number of people who described themselves as atheists, secular, or agnostic had dropped by 450%. In 1994, Morocco attempted to join the European Federation, but their application was denied. The countries that imported their phosphate also claimed that their trade contracts were now null and would need to be re-negotiated as the states were now part of a larger entity, and thus the contract reflected an obsolete nation. There was nothing in the European Constitution that stipulated this though, and in reality, it was just another attempt to exploit Morocco. In 1995, Morocco joined the Alliance of Nations, and continued to limp on towards the 21st century. 

This ended in June of 1996, when a massive drought devastated the Maghreb region. President Benhassen’s response to this was incredibly lackluster, and he was eventually impeached in July of 1996. His Prime Minister, Abdelkarim Tazi, took over as acting President, and tried to keep the country together. Western Sahara was officially given independence (it had already been completely autonomous by 1983) as it was seen as too expensive to maintain. Rationing was reduced to a point where people were barely given enough to live, and martial law was declared after food riots in Casablanca caused 203 deaths. 

President Tazi desperately tried to keep the country together, but it was running on fumes and held together with duct tape, spit, and hope. In 1997, Morocco had run out of oil and could no longer afford to transport their phosphate to the coasts for shipping, leading to it being prioritized for domestic use. Sandstorms in 1998 and 1999 caused further strife, and a border crisis near Tangier almost led to war with the Federation, which made a promising deal with FulTec fall through. 

Spillover from the Algerian Civil War forced Morocco to honor the Pact of Gribaltar and send troops to their eastern neighbor, however, this led to the interior of the country becoming only minimally defended. This was when former President Benhassen launched his “revolution”: bitter at his impeachment and feeling humiliated, he had been contacted by an agent of Director Savateev and was persuaded to go down the path of full communism. Using guns smuggled from Tunisia, Benhassen stormed the capitol, forced King Hicham I to reinstate him as President by “royal decree”, and killed President Tazi by hanging him. Some of his more radical supporters, believing that the Soviet model was the way of the future, began purging religious leaders in the community. Things got out of control and President Benhassen was hanged by his own men for not being an atheist, and things only got messier from there. The troops on their way to Algeria were recalled and a brutal civil war broke out. 

The Red King once again took up his mantle and tried to direct the military, suspending the democratic functions of government until the crisis was under control. The rebels, upon taking Casablanca, declared the “Socialist Republic of Morocco” and immediately allied themselves with the Soviets. In 2000, when shipments of Soviet weapons and supplies began arriving, the Civil War teetered on the brink of victory for the Socialists, while the Monarchist Forces were routed. King Hicham I was killed during the bombing of Rabat in 2001, and it seemed that the Monarchist Forces were about to surrender when an unexpected ally appeared: the Federation. While they were not AS involved as they were during the Greek Civil War, they did keep the Monarchists from losing for the majority of 2002. 

And then the Red Summer hit, and all the European and Soviet support dried up. More soldiers died from heat exhaustion than from combat, and temporary, spontaneous truces were formed on the battlefields as combatants stayed in the shade. The Socialists, believing their cause more just, broke the truces and got the last Monarchist holdouts to surrender. 

The Socialist Republic of Morocco lasted for less than two years, as in 2005, the Federation invaded Morocco to “liberate” them from the yoke of Moscow. The USSR, busy dealing with the Greek Civil War, the spreading Red Flu and various rebellions, could not spare anything and thus the Federation pacified Morocco in less than a week. 

A puppet state was formed, the Federation of Morocco, led by a Spanish general in the Federation’s Army. Not much changed, really - phosphate was extracted at great material cost, and hundreds died a month from heat exhaustion. Federation soldiers openly patrolled the streets, and criminals were executed rather than being sent to jail or to a labor camp. Collaborators were given extra water, extra food, reduced work hours and better housing. 

Of course, nationalists and rebels made it hard for them. Bombings by Moroccans led to retaliatory killings by the Federation. Displaying the Moroccan flag (of either the original kingdom or the socialist republic) became a crime in 2006. Works of art and national monuments were destroyed. Groups of more than 5 people were prohibited. Ironically, this common enemy made the Socialists and the Monarchists (though there weren’t many left) join forces, with King Hicham I’s personal guard taking several Federation soldiers hostage during a riot. 


Photograph of a crowd of rebels displaying the Moroccan flag during a protest in Casablanca. Taken in 2008. 

In response, the Federation simply bombed them, killing their troops and over 400 civilians as well. As word began to spread in the Federation of the massacre (despite their control of the media), public support began to dwindle. FulTec decided it was necessary, and so the operation continued, despite the Federation’s losses in Greece. 

The Federation’s control was finally lifted when a massive flood in 2009 destroyed the last functional ports on Morocco’s coasts, and it was deemed too expensive to repair them, so the troops were hastily pulled out. Many were left behind, with some of them joining the Monarchists and Socialists, which were at odds yet again. Federation collaborators were strung up by nooses, then suspected collaborators, and then anyone the mob didn’t agree with. 

The civil war resumed, and marched on into 2010 and 2011 before finally collapsing into anarchy in the Purple Summer of 2011. People were no longer fighting over phosphate, or for ideological reasons, but instead fighting over caches of FulTec rations or access to water. Warlords formed fiefdoms, forcing slaves to work to death in fields. Every month, hundreds died in suicide attacks to become martyrs. 

The Great Heat Wave of 2015 forced many of the survivors to flee north and into the Atlas mountains, divided by the remnants of the Socialists, Monarchists, and Federation Forces. All three factions had long given up their ideologies, essentially becoming identical warlords. In 2017, the Moroccans allied for the last time and forced the remnants of the Federation, led by a Spanish Warlord, into the ruins of north-west Algeria. 

After the Second Great Heat Wave of 2023, many were sick of the fighting and drifted west, eventually settling on the coast in the husks of the once-opulent resort cities. Settlements began to be formed as treasure hunters combed the ruins for anything that could be useful, and ate whatever they could, including their dead. A complex barter economy was established and these towns became loosely allied with each other against the Socialists and the Monarchists, who would come down from the mountains to raid them for supplies. 

In 2026, Morocco became flooded with refugees fleeing from the European Spring and the dwindling power of the Federation, who mainly joined the side of the Scavengers. This resulted in a brief increase in living standards as European mechanics and engineers created crude desalination systems and pumps. Morocco’s coast became a relatively nice place once again, as long as you didn’t go out during the day and were fine eating dead raiders. 

The Solar Flare of 2026 put an end to this, as whatever ramshackle technology the Scavengers and Mountain Raiders had built fell apart. The Scavengers were able to repair some of it, but for the Mountain Raiders, they did not have the skills, knowing only two decades of guerilla warfare. They looked down with jealousy at their neighbors and ramped up their raids significantly. 

By 2027, the Mountain Raiders were mounting offensives using looted Federation weapons. Now, the Scavengers were running from the ever-expanding ocean and the Raiders from above. 
Mauritania

Official name: Islamic Republic of Mauritania (until 1989), State of Mauritania (1989-2011)
Capital: Nouakchott (until 2002), Nouadhibou (2002-2011)
Government Type: Authoritarian Republic (until 1989), Feudal State (1989-2011)
Population as of final census conducted: 5,439,151 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: Less than 1000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $111.7 Million USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Organization of African States (until 1989)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Mauritania remained rather obscure and forgotten, even as far back as the 1960s. While they did sign the Shanghai Accords in the 1970s, the Islamic Republic of Mauritania was not very involved on the world stage, being a regional power at best. Mauritania, while they remained an observer state of the League for Arab Prosperity, were never granted full membership due to their resistance towards full on Arab Socialism and creating a Zakat state. Mauritania also never joined the Non-Aligned Movement, as they tried repeatedly to get into the trading blocs dominated by the USSR and China, flip-flopping between the two blocs in a futile attempt to curry favor with the two Eastern Giants. In the end, the country joined the smallest, least recognized and least influential trading bloc: the Organization of African States, which was composed of similarly ignored countries. 

The only resources of note within Mauritania were some reserves of iron, the rest of their vast resources were located in areas deep within the Sahara or in areas where it was extremely impractical and costly to extract them. While their economy never went into a recession, its GDP never rose as fast as their neighbors. Countries only bought their iron when they very urgently needed it for construction, and could not wait for cheaper, farther away sources to be shipped to them. Consequently, Mauritania became known as “Ould Daddah’s Playground”. Occasionally, some of the more socially liberal states like Morocco or Argentina would threaten an investigation by the UN, but they remained empty threats. 

In 1975, while trying to join the World Prosperity Alliance, Ould Daddah was thoroughly discouraged from invading Western Sahara. Instead, he tried to create a program of “National Excellence in Resources”, which basically boiled down to surveying the Sahara for mineral deposits. The results were quite bad (due to mismanagement, corruption, and sheer incompetency), and the findings are what cost them their potential partnership with China. 

Being their only lifeline, the iron mines were exploited more and more every year, with some of them reaching over 2 km deep into the earth. These remained extremely dangerous sites, yet millions still worked in them as it was the only reliable occupation in the country. The country teetered on the brink of famine several times, and the aging President Ould Daddah, at the insistence of the Soviet Ambassador (he was trying to join COMECON at this time) created a “self-reliance” food program, which boiled down to intensive fishing. In 1982, Mauritania almost got into a war with Senegal (another COMECON state) over fishing rights, which caused Mauritania to fail their application yet again. 

Droughts in the early 1980s forced many to move into the cities to look for work, further crowding the coast. Austerity programs and rationing initiatives created in the mid-80s also helped slow down the consumption of resources. Conversely, fishing only intensified, and several species were reported extinct as early as 1983. To further solidify his control, President Ould Daddah started covertly rounding up the nomadic ethnic minorities and forcing them to work in the mines, on the grounds of “protecting them from heat exhaustion”. In 1985, full-on resettlement programs forced the rest of the people in the interior of the country, those who had stayed behind, and placed them in newly built “economic invigoration camps”. Ould Daddah believed these initiatives would make the country look more modern, and thus more attractive to the rest of the world. 

By 1987, 90% of Mauritania’s population was located within 5 miles of the coastline, and the remaining 10% were military personnel who patrolled the desert territories for incursions. To Ould Daddah’s surprise, it turned out that no one wanted vast stretches of scorching sand, but still he kept the patrols up. Mauritania wasn’t as bad off as places like Bolivia, but very, very few prospects existed for its citizens. Many citizens tried to emigrate to other nations, and that was partly the reason behind the population resettlement programs and military patrols - if everyone could leave, he’d have no one to rule over. 

Because of how isolated Mauritania was from the world stage (though not by choice), they were barely affected by the Crash of ‘88 and the aftermath of the Sinai War. Food and fuel were already being rationed, and they were simply extended. President Ould Daddah reportedly laughed up hearing how Egypt and the rest of the Middle East had gone up in nuclear flames - he viewed it as justice for having excluded him for so long. 

Problems only really started making themselves apparent in 1989, as various countries in Europe, the Americas and Africa placed tariffs on their iron. This was Mauritania’s last lifeline, and with it, the economy was washed away with the tide. 

On February 7, 1989, President Ould Daddah would appear on live television to attempt to reassure the handful of wealthy citizens that things were totally fine, and Mauritania would find another source of income. This went so badly, that he was assassinated with a hand grenade halfway through his speech, with the cameras still rolling. 

There was no civil war - there wasn’t really anything to fight over. A bloodless coup (minus Ould Daddah’s corpse) of a cabal of wealthy land owners, industrialists, farmers, and mine owners banded together and decided to cut back on what little worker’s rights were left. They all decided that it was a mistake to ban slavery, and thus reinstated it. It was claimed that it gave every man a purpose, and the radical leaders in the new government even claimed it was their right. 

But that was where the new rulers’ common interests stopped. Infighting and disagreements quickly fractured the coalition, turning the patchwork of slave-based city states. People starved to death every day, or were forced to eat barely-organic foods that people in the 2020s would salivate at. The strict caste system and the sheer callousness of the Beidane had caused many, many people to die. Sometimes, landlords would force their slaves to swarm another Beidane’s land. In the Hot Summer of 1990, some slave owners even started feeding their slaves the remains of their fallen brothers, as they were seen as unworthy of receiving actual food. Other slave owners believed this was barbaric, leading to a small war, but the anarchy remained. 

Each of the city-states claimed to be the true successor to Mauritania, and some of them waged war on the others to grow their influence. By 1995, Mauritania had been divided into several major factions. The Iron Tagant controlled the remnants of the iron mines, though they were quickly running out of ore. The Salt Lords sold their fish to the other factions, but they too were running out of stock. Sublime Gorgol was the largest of these factions and sold crops to the others. 

And what did they use as a currency? Well, the only resource in abundance left - other humans. Very large transactions were paid for in iron, fish, or bread, or sometimes gold, but for tiny transactions, slaves were exchanged. How many slaves a lord owned was viewed as how influential they were, with the more slaves they owned, the more powerful their standing was. Mercenaries engaged in expeditions into the Sahara to capture fleeing refugees, and sold them in the coastal cities for fish and bread. 

Word of the “Black State of Mauritania” spread, and those caught out in the deserts usually started to travel in large groups, as well as armed as they could, to fight off the raiders. Many women chose suicide if they feared their capture was imminent and there was no way out. Eventually, a small coalition of escaped slaves and militant socialists banded together in the Sahara, and began hunting these raiders back. This faction, the Sands of Time, were supposedly supported by Libya and Senegal. 

But for the Despots in the Black State, this only further emboldened them. The three factions united in 1998, forming the Confederation of Sublime Mauritania, and coordinated only in the defense of their territory. The back-and-forth nature of the raids only intensified, and in 2002, Nouakchott was destroyed in a series of brutal bombings. Senegal did not claim responsibility. 

The Red Summer of 2003 caused much of the population in the Sahara to die from dehydration, and raids no longer went east, instead focussing on Western Sahara and Morocco. Slave revolutions picked up in frequency in the 2000s. Iron Tagant was overthrown in 2004, followed by Sublime Gorgol in 2006. The Salt Lords held on through sheer force of will, and were the de facto inheritors of Mauritania’s legacy. 

However, in the Purple Summer of 2011, the increasing heat and acidification of the ocean caused the last local fish to be hunted to extinction. And with it, the remains of civilization also went extinct. 

Evidence is somewhat scarce, but according to Senegalese documents from around the time, a huge number of refugees from the north attempted to cross into Senegal. Some of them were shot down, and others escaped into the fragmenting states to the east. A final civil war, followed by a slave uprising, and followed by anarchy led to Mauritania to complete a complete wasteland by 2015. A few scavengers from Morocco ventured down the coast, though there was very little worth taking and by 2023, scavengers had stopped going that far south. 

By 2027, Mauritania was an empty, desolate wasteland. 
Somalia

Official name: Somali Zakat Republic (until 1990), Somali Caliphate (2000-2009)
Capital: Mogadishu
Government Type: Left-Wing Authoritarian Dictatorship (until 1990), Far-Right Theocracy (2000-2009)
Population as of final census conducted: 20,391,961 (circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 2,400,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $152 Billion USD
Primary Language: Somali/Af Soomaali
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: World Prosperity Alliance
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial


Somalia was a major battle ground for the proxy war between the USSR and China. In the 1970s, both countries dumped absurd amounts of money into Somalia’s economy and government. General Barre used this aid very well actually, significantly reducing rural poverty, having Soviet-style government purges against corruption, and dramatically increasing the literacy rate across the country. Goaded by China, and as a compromise for Ethiopia gaining Eritrea, Djibouti was granted to Somalia in an attempt to curry favor with them. 

As the Arab world was very intertwined with the Soviet Union, Barre made several alliances with other Arab Nations. This led to both Somalia and Ethiopia making peace over the Ogaden region, with the area being granted autonomy but still technically being administered by Ethiopia. Part of the treaty, known as the Dubai Pact (as it was mediated in the United Arab Emirates), stipulated that Ethiopian and Somali citizens could cross their border without visas, and also were given economic incentives to buy from each other. Ethiopian factory workers would cross the border every morning to go to work in Somalia, and Somali grocers stocked the markets of Ethiopia. The highlight of the treaty was that a new, joint Somali football team was formed (comprising of Ethiopia, Somalia, and the lands formerly known as Eritrea and Djibouti, respectively). In private, both Barre and his counterpart Selassie were unhappy with the situation, but it was a requirement for the ludicrous amounts of foreign aid both nations were receiving. The welfare state only increased, and after much pestering from his Arab allies, Somalia was renamed to the Somali Zakat Republic in 1979. 

In 1980, seeing the rapid growth in China, Barre fully allied with them and joined their trading bloc, the World Prosperity Alliance. The USSR did not take this well, and completely severed diplomatic relations. This opened the flood gates for China to come in and invest even more into the infrastructure of the country, with factories and processing plants springing up along the coast. China even rented out several docks from the government, and used them for unloading products for the African nations. China ended up using Somalia as a massive testing ground for all of their industrialization “experiments” for their adventures in the 2000s. Several mega-factories were built, mainly along the north coast along the Gulf of Aden to help facilitate shipping. Yet despite all of this industrial investment, their economy is still almost entirely based on agriculture. 

When the Sinai War, the Crash of ‘88 and the Shock rolled around, Somalia remained relatively stable. Their huge surplus of food kept everyone well fed, and rationing was not implemented until 1990. Much of the welfare related to education and healthcare had to be gradually scaled back, and Barre’s advisors were ripping their hair out trying to convince foreign businesses not to leave. The only country that still regularly traded with them was China, however, warehouses began to be raided by roving bands of refugees fleeing from the apocalyptic chaos in the north. On top of that, the industrial effects of China’s “economically viable” machinery led to a mass-die off of fish and ground water pollution, culminating in a week-long torrent of acid rain followed by a months-long sandstorm. Within just a few weeks, the people were rioting in the streets and raiding government depots. Barre, not believing it was China who was responsible for this sharp decline of living conditions, suspected it was sabotage carried out by Ethiopian saboteurs, so he rallied the country and blamed everything on Ethiopia, promptly invading them on June 27 1990. 

The Ethiopian-Somali “War”, if one could call it that, ended in a massacre as the comparatively professional Ethiopian Army gunned down the armies of peasants. By July 1, just a few days later, over 100,000 Somali soldiers had died and the Ethiopians had only lost three men. Barre tried to bug out and escape, but was caught in the streets of the capital and strung up by Soviet-influenced revolutionaries. 

This quickly spiraled out of control into a 25-way civil war, with just about every one of Barre’s advisors and commanders claiming to be the new head of state. Djibouti claimed independence but was immediately annexed by Ethiopia in 1991. Somalia collapsed into feudalism at best, and absolute anarchy at worst. City states rose and fell, declaring war on each other and raiding depots. Chinese factories were retooled to pump out weapons, and gangs, bandits and raiders carved up the countryside into tiny fiefdoms. Scavengers and pirates exploited refugees from the Middle Eastern nations, mainly from Yemen, and sold scrap to rump states in the Arabian peninsula. 

In many ways, Somalia was even more unstable than the ruined rump states in the Middle East, and several nations proposed a United Nations mission to help stabilize the region - but that brought into question if the nations in the Middle East needed to be stabilized as well, and then there debates about if the Soviet invasion of Iran and Afghanistan needed to be fought off too, and the conversations just devolved into further “but what if…” and nothing was done. Even China stopped trading with Somalia, just ignoring it for the most part and waiting for the anarchy to settle down. 

The brutal chaos continued until around 2000, when the civil war finally died down and a very unlikely successor arose: an Islamic warlord by the name of Warsame Nur al-Haqq. He was a devout follower of Qatafism, the mutation from Twelver Shia that was used to justify the Sinai War. As such, he turned the ruins of Mogadishu into an agrarian confederacy of neo-luddites. He immediately set out to reunite the rest of Somalia, succeeding in late 2004. When he attempted to take back Djibouti, Ethiopia beat them back and Ayatollah Nur al-Haqq was killed in battle on September 22, 2005. 

Somalia once again fractured into civil war, as the Ayatollah’s many lieutenants fell to infighting much like Barre had before them. The northern coast declared independence and sandstorms devastated the area around Mogadishu until the Caliphate finally collapsed in 2009. While the agrarian neo-luddite lifestyle remained the country would never be reunited. 

The northern coast, being the most stable region of the area despite the frequent droughts and famines, were visited by China in 2006. China was barely able to restore the power plants and build a desalination plant before they pulled out in 2007 and never returned. This tiny area, known as the People’s Democratic Republic of Somaliland, was frequently beset by all sides from refugees, raiders, pirates, bandits and religious militants from the south. However, with how sparse technology was in Somalia, along with the strict distrust of technology, it was very easy to fight off the invaders. Somaliland’s main problem was the amount of people who wanted to emigrate to the relative stability of Ethiopia. 

Between 2009 and 2011, almost 80% of the surviving population in Somaliland fled west, and it wasn’t until 2012 that word finally reached the desolate streets of Hargeisa that Ethiopia had fallen to civil war as well. And so, with nowhere else to go, the people in Somaliland eked out an existence the best they could. Technology frequently broke down due to the constant sandstorms, or melted in the heat, or just simply stopped working. This forced them to go out on scavenging runs, and less than a fifth came back alive, and most of the time they didn’t even find what they were looking for. 

Cannibalism had been practiced openly for some time, but nobody reveled in it. When famine struck (and there was always a famine somewhere) the dead were prepared in a communal soup. Other than that, people ate sorghum and cassava bread or roasted maize. In the aftermath of the First Great Heatwave of 2015, Somaliland set up a series of low-tech desalination plants that used the sun’s heat to sterilize dirty water through condensation, though it was a very slow process. Water gradually became the most valuable commodity in the stagnating republic and was used to reward workers and farmers loyal to the Somaliland regime. By the 2020s, Somaliland was very similar to the agrarian anarchy to the south, not because they distrusted technology but because everything had more or less broken down. Desertification had gotten so bad that Somaliland was effectively cut off from the feudal confederacy of the Water Lords, and millions died. 

Many took the Second Great Heatwave as a divine punishment, and the waning Somaliland Regime stopped trying to enforce the ban on religion. The Victorious Queen expanded into south-west Somalia to get access to the coast, but flooding and desertification kept them from expanding further. After the Solar Flare of 2026, there was no longer a difference between the agrarian luddites to the south and the pretend communists in Somaliland, and many are losing hope. Apocalyptic suicide cults have sprung up along the shrinking coast, but the government can’t really dissuade people from it - what are they gonna do, shoot them? This dealt a massive blow to the public image of the Communist Party of Somaliland, as it was found the General Secretary had participated in a suicide ritual with 200 others on December 5, 2026.

As of 2027, Somaliland is a desolate place. No raids or civil wars are fought there - there is nothing to fight over. The mass deaths from famines, drought, and flooding have led to the population actually stabilizing, so cannibalism is kept to a minimum, but the people left in Somaliland are trapped there. There are no materials to make boats to cross the sea to Mecca, and there are no desalination systems left, just pumps and rickety old wells. All anyone can do is simply wait for the end to come. 

Section 2: Dreams of a United Arabia
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ft_dXvtLceE 
United Arab Emirates

Official name: United Zakat Emirates
Capital: Haya
Government Type: Federal Constitutional Monarchy
Population as of final census conducted: 23,138,230 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 10,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.461 Trillion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: League for Arab Cooperation
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

The United Arab Emirates emerged from the shell of the Trucial States in 1966 and by 1972 had become one of the richest and most prosperous nations in the history of the world. Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan was not successful in securing military aid from the British, instead they chose to support the economic and financial development of the new nation. Roads and highways were built with British money and massive oil wells covered the landscape. This infrastructure ensured that the resources in the UAE would be easily accessible by the energy-hungry nations visiting the Persian Gulf for oil. The British got a massive discount of course, and the UAE’s GDP grew by almost 1,567,540% between 1967 and 1988. In 1979, they joined the “Trillion Dollar Club”, a prestigious title that indicated that they were among the wealthiest nations in the world. 

The UAE chose the path of Zakatism only in 1981 at the insistence of the other Arab states. The average person in the UAE did not experience as much of a living standard increase as in places like Syria, Saudi Arabia or Libya, but it remained a prosperous place. The UAE was also the site of some of the largest and most obscene vanity projects in history, such as a palace made entirely out of gold, a city with perfume mixed into the building materials, an underwater football stadium, performing Khaleeji folk dances in zero-G environments, spectacular car races (the match in 1985 included jumping the Strait of Hormuz) and making intricate glass sculptures out of desert sand that could catch light in unique ways and recreate scenes from the Quran. 

The Al Noor Al-Kamil Museum, frequently referred to as just “the Kamil”, became the largest and most prestigious art collection in the pre-Great Death world. It was located in Umm Al Quwain and according to many, it put the Louvre to shame. Many of the Sheikhs would also import foreign art work to display in their spacious private mansions. The Sheikh of Dubai was known for being particularly interested in collecting Japanese poetry, to which he would read aloud to his guests at his weekly balls. Other Sheikhs were more interested in the sciences or religion, as the Sheikh of Sharjah was an internationally renowned expert in the history of mathematics during the Golden Age of Islam. Conversely, the Sheikh of Fujairah had graduated from several prestigious British universities during the 1960s, and ordered a report on the way oil extraction could affect nature. 

This report, called the 1978 Report, completely changed how the Sheikh of Fujairah saw the world. He ordered all copies of it destroyed. 

Meanwhile, as a way of fostering unity and understanding between the Emirates, a joint project was proposed to create a shining “city of the future” to be the new capital of this nation. This project took many years and cost almost $400 Trillion USD, but it employed a great many people. It started in 1967 and was finished in 1985 in a grand ceremony attended by many of the most famous people in the world, including President Franklin King, Secretary Gennady Yanayev, Chairman Chen Qiang, Commissioner Friedrich von Schwerin, along with the leaders of many other countries. The opening ceremony lasted an entire 5 hours, while the opening festival lasted an entire week. Fireworks and neon tubes kept the city immersed in a constant stream of colors and sounds. The ten largest buildings in the world were all located in the city, and there was even a private jet plane service to transport executives between skyscrapers. 

When the city was nearing its completion, a referendum was held on what to name the city. Many names were submitted, the popular ones including Dignity, Karma, and Tawāḍu. In the end, Haya won. The city quickly became the subject of many legends throughout the Post-Great Death Era, including the fabled “Crystal City”. 

As Qatifism rose in the late 1980s, the President of the United Zakat Emirates, President Saeed Al-Mazrouei, chose to support his Arab kin, though only minimally. Sanctions were placed in Israel (thus violating the Tehran Accords) but that was the extent of his support - no money was sent to Egypt or guns to the United Arab Army, and they did not allow any of the members of the Egyptian Coalition to use their ports or military bases. Because of this, when the bombs dropped, the UZE was spared any nuclear blasts. 

This did not help them survive any better. Their problems were just beginning. 

On June 17, 1988, a large group of Qatifist militants crossed the border from Saudi Arabia and started sabotaging pipelines heading into the Arabian desert. The President authorized the miniscule armed forces of the UZE to stabilize the region, but this was a feint - the real target was Dubai. Several mysterious packages arrived in the ports of Dubai and over 4000 people were injured before the authorities locked down the city. Mosques and businesses were bombed and over $600 Billion USD of damage occurred on June 17 alone. On June 18, the Sheikh of Abu Dhabi was assassinated, causing a minor succession crisis due to his only son taking credit for the bombings. By June 19, this had spiraled into a civil war as the President did not recognize his claim but four of the other Sheikhs did. On June 20, waves of refugees started pouring in, and this split the government of the UZE further. On June 21 President Al-Mazrouei was killed by being pushed out a window (official sources claim he had given up and decided to end it all) and any semblance of a unified government went with him. 

Waves of Qatifist militants and displaced refugees flowed across the formerly United Zakat Emirates, with many foreign businesses leaving Dubai and Haya. The site of the Chinese embassy was particularly gruesome, as the Ambassador was reportedly drowned in oil. It was estimated that one in 20 diplomatic personnel were killed during the fall of Haya and Dubai. 

By July, the country was divided into a brutal civil war with large swathes of it in anarchy. Fumes from burning oil wells coated the sky with smog for decades. Mansions were destroyed by hordes of Qatifists, believing they were purging hedonism from the world. 

By August, things were getting downright apocalyptic. Multiple Emirates were overthrown, replaced by a Qatifist government that immediately fractured to infighting. The harsh winds merged with the oil fires to create giant flaming sandstorms that shredded entire towns and burned the remains. 

People fled east to the Hajar mountains into Oman, or stole boats to sail across the gulf into Iran (which still had a government at this point). Pakistan conducted several evacuations in early August before they were attacked by Qatifists and forced to stop. 

Warlords began to emerge near the end of 1988, conducting raids on the many strongholds in the mountains and other Qatifist fiefdoms. Floods and fires destroyed the remaining buildings along the coast. Artifacts and treasures, some predating Islam, were thrown into the sea. Transformers and power stations were destroyed for being “altars to Iblis". 

Once all the “temptations” were destroyed (or at least attempted to), the surviving warlords began to create “awqāf”, or communal towns ruled by a Qatif warlord. These towns remained very stagnant and barebones, with only minimal technology, and many died from famine, corruption, drought, and environmental hazards. All of these Qatifist settlements died out by 2000, falling from warfare or radiation. 

Some of the more saner warlords in the northern reaches of the Middle East (mainly around the ruins of Israel or Syria), once the dust had settled and everyone was eking out an existence before dying of radiation poisoning, began spreading campfire tales of the wondrous glories of Haya and Dubai, and the many treasures they held. Expeditions into the scorched ruins of the Emirates became a popular pastime for scavengers and raiders alike. In 2001, a joint expedition between pilgrims of the United Arab Republic of the Nile and the State of Hejaz ventured into the ruins of the UZE and came back with many Islamic works of art produced during the Glorious Decades. Further expeditions were met with limited success. 

However, in the northern reaches of the Hajar mountains, outside the ruins of Fujairah, a tiny enclave of hardened survivors gradually coalesced. Some of the survivors were from as far as Bahrain, others from Yemen. These survivors, while they had no official name, have been referred to by historians as the “Fujairah Group”.  Records show that they were extremely territorial and hostile to any groups that intruded on their territory due to frequent raids from warlords, Qatifists, and bandits. During an expedition to the region around 2678 AD, ruins were uncovered showing a massive wall made from scrap metal and rusted vehicles. Skeletons were found impaled on spikes, serving as a warning. It is speculated that the group operated on a strict survivalist doctrine, where members cooperated only when it ensured the community’s survival. It was also remarkably egalitarian, especially for a community in that part of the world: both women and men worked alongside each other to defend the fortifications or grow food. The population peaked at around 50,000 people, and the group was attacked multiple times and had lost territory, as evidenced by multiple fortifications that have been partially destroyed. It is speculated that sometime around 2070, the group died out or left the area, becoming nomads. 

As of 2027, the United Zakat Emirates are a wasteland, with the exception of the Fujairah enclave. 
Bahrain

Official name: Zakat State of Bahrain
Capital: Manama
Government Type: Syndicalist Arab Republic (until 1988), Authoritarian Dictatorship (1988-1992, disputed)
Population as of final census conducted: 2,574,376 (circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: Uninhabitable
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $467.2 Billion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: COMECON
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Bahrain was born in 1965 when workers toppled the British occupation of the kingdom. This created a period of instability, where the National Liberation Front, the Arab Nationalist Movement and the National Union Committee all vied for control. The National Liberation Front was funded by the USSR. The Arab Nationalists were funded by Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Lastly, the National Union Committee was funded by a loose coalition of nations who simply wanted peace in the region: namely, the USA, Britain, Iran, and at one point even China. Then, in 1967, the NLF split and Maoist Militia was formed, called the Popular Front. This faction was funded by China. 

In many ways, the instability in Bahrain was considered the “Great Arab Front of the Cold War”, being compared to the Korean War or the Vietnam War. It was estimated that 24,000 people lost their lives during the fighting in 1965-1969. In 1969, President Nixon would authorize the sale of over $5 million USD worth of guns and arms to the NUC forces, with Britain donating many old weapons from WW1 to them. This proved to be a turning point, and with Soviet and Chinese forces being bogged down in the Sino-Soviet Border War, in addition to Secretary Brezhnev being assassinated earlier that year, the NLF and PF floundered. The Arab Nationalists, not wanting to spill more blood of their brothers, surrendered. A truce was signed on June 1, 1969, and the Nationalists joined forces with the NUC to secure the rest of the country. The last rebel outpost, being a Popular Front outpost in the caves in the center of the Island, surrendered on June 29. 

A formal armistice was signed on July 20, 1969, and a provisional government led by the NUC was formed, with elections being slated for August of 1970. That said, the representatives of the Western Countries realized that maybe they had backed the wrong faction, as while this new Bahrain wasn’t communist, it was its own breed of socialism: syndicalism. The National Union Committee was in fact an alliance of unions from the numerous oil rigs around Bahrain, and even a union of oil tankers. The government was not made up of representatives or members of the ruling party, but instead directly ran by the members of the unions that worked the country. 

On August 24th, 1970, the first general election concluded and Hassan al-Mutairi became Chairman of the People’s Syndicalist Confederation of Bahrain. This new Bahrain was remarkably decentralized, with the capital simply being where the Chairman lived. Meetings of the People’s Congress of Bahrain met every year at a random industrial site, and was essentially just a union meeting on a national scale. If one was a member of a union, they were considered to be an extension of the government, and thus Bahrain technically held the record for the highest percent of the population working in government, being 96.7%. 

The most popular unions decided to merge together into a political bloc, called the People’s Party of Bahrain, and won re-election in 1975, 1980, and 1985. Chairman al-Mutairi was reelected in each subsequent election as well, though his cabinet changed very frequently to provide adequate representation. Despite being the first officially secular Arab nation, Bahrain was officially renamed to the Zakat State of Bahrain in 1982. 

Most of Bahrain’s budget went to safety inspections, infrastructure maintenance, housing development and agricultural imports. Healthcare and vacations were provided by the government and voted on by unions, housing was made by people, for the people. Corruption was remarkably scarce, as the Bahraini took immense pride and joy in their work and publicly shamed anyone caught embezzling or skimping on the safety of their workers. Bahraini oil rigs eventually turned into tiny ocean-bound enclaves that could hold almost 2000 people each, equating to a small city, with entertainment and schooling for the families of the workers. 

In 1972, Bahrain was recognized as independent by Iran as part of the Tehran Accords, in exchange for Iran having a stake in their oil industry. The Tehran-Bahrain Oil Company remained marginal in the politics of Bahrain. 

Bahrain was not a popular place. It had an extremely small population, and emigration was a notable issue throughout the 1980s. In 1975, after a national referendum, diplomatic ties with China were severed, with Chairman al-Mutairi citing Chen’s betrayal of the workers as the main cause. In 1983, after the USSR began to reform and open itself up more, Chairman al-Mutairi believed the next step they would take was to become syndicalist like Bahrain. As a way of the two countries growing closer, Bahrain joined COMECON in 1984. 

In the mid-1980s, a new ideology began to emerge in the politics of the nation: pan-Arab Syndicalism. Many of the workers of Bahrain began to believe that a unified Arab nation, operating on syndicalism, was the next natural step to the Zakat state. As such, while Bahrain did not participate in the Sinai War, they did support their Arab brothers in the hope of creating a unified Arabian state. Bahrain did place sanctions on Israel, and at one point even thought of nationalizing the Tehran-Bahrain Oil Company due to Iran’s reluctant support of Israel. 

When the Israelis decided to engage in Operation: Samson and retaliate, Bahrain was considered, but the Prime Minister of Israel decided against it - Israel’s goal was to never completely wipe out an entire nation. So even though Bahrain was spared from nuclear devastation, they were not spared from the chaos that engulfed the Middle East. 

Bahrain was a major target for the rogue Qatifist-dominant United Arab Army. After the Capture of Jerusalem, several Iraqi divisions headed towards the southern peninsula in an attempt to capture Mecca from the Sunnis. Along the way, some of them diverged and headed east to take out the monuments to hedonism in the United Zakat Emirates. Bahrain was on this path, and parts of the Saudi Navy attempted to defend Bahrain from the UAA. 

Bahrain of course had a very small military, as most of the security budget was devoted to law enforcement. The Saudi ships defended the island nation as best they could, but they were easy targets for what was left of the Iraqi air force, as they indiscriminately bombed everything on the sea around Bahrain. Throughout June 1988, every single Bahraini oil rig was disabled if not outright destroyed. Burning oil and smoke choked the skies so thickly that the entire Gulf of Persia was obscured for several months, preventing access to ports. 

Chairman al-Mutairi, seeing how Qatifist militants would invade their island any day now, took several sweeping authoritarian measures and centralized the government. This was done without the approval of any of the unions, and several of them walked out and declared their own governments. This caused a second civil war, except this time they were also fighting Qatifists and Soviet-backed communists. Chairman al-Mutairi was assassinated by pro-Soviet communists on September 7, 1988. Manama was destroyed by Qatifists in November of 1988, and radioactive rain began to soak the island. 

By 1992, the civil war had fizzled out into pure anarchy and chaos. Once much of the technology had been destroyed, and all the accessible oil burned, the Qatifists left the island, never to return. The survivors, numbering less than 1% of the pre-1988 population, tried to band together and scrape out some kind of life. This proved significantly harder than they thought, and just a few months later held a referendum to create a series of boats to sail to somewhere better. The results were to try to move to Iran, unaware of the equally chaotic situation there. 

When the ramshackle fleet of boats arrived on the shores of the Iranian Soviet Republic, they were attacked and besieged by Iranian Zakat Socialists who persecuted the Bahrainis for being too secular. The refugees fled further east, with some of them taking refuge in the Afghan mountains, and some of them going either further, only to be shot on sight by the Pakistani military. A very small number of the survivors reached India and were resettled in the Kashmir mountains. These Bahrainis (estimated to be less than 100) would end up becoming a part of the Kashmir Covenant after the Indo-Pakistani Nuclear War of 2002. 

Ironically, around 2003, a group of refugees fleeing the Indo-Pakistani War would end up settling in the ruins of a Bahraini oil rig in the Persian Gulf. This settlement lasted only a few years before falling into the ocean in 2007. 

Throughout the 2010s, the island once known as Bahrain was occasionally picked over by survivors and scavengers. Around 2013, a group of Italian neo-crusaders tried to extract some of the oil in Bahrain, but they all died of heat stroke. The ruins of Bahrain were referred to as a "monument of sin” by Qatifists before the movement died out in 2035. 

As of 2027, the island sits there still, baking in the sun. 
Lebanon

Official name: Zakat Republic of Lebanon (until 1989), Emergency Auxiliary Regime of Lebanon (1989-2003)
Capital: Beirut (until 1989), Tripoli (1989-2003)
Government Type: Federal Republic (until 1989), Authoritarian Confederacy (until 2003)
Population as of final census conducted: 6,475,693 (Circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 10,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $326.9 Billion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (until 1988)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

The United States, seeking to counter the growing influence the Soviet Union was gaining in the Middle East, opted to send additional troops to Lebanon in 1969 and 1970. With this additional support, the vast number of PLO members in Lebanon were pacified, with some even speculating that a civil war could have happened if the US had not provided additional support. 

Lebanon remained the deregulated financial hub of the Middle East, sometimes called the “Arab Switzerland”. In the 1970s, it was even claimed that there was snow on the peaks of the mountains, and many wealthy Arabs frequently vacationed there during Laylat al-Raghaib. Lebanese banks were where many oil barons and artists stored their wealth, and Lebanon also had many coastal resorts and yacht clubs. And just like European Switzerland, Lebanon remained quite neutral during the Glorious Decades. In 1972, as part of the Tehran Accords, the members of the PLO in Lebanon were forced to relocate. Many chose to move to Iraq. 

In 1976, President Élias Sarkis began to lift many of the emergency decrees passed in the early 1970s and full democracy was restored to Lebanon. His successor ended up being Rami Haddad of the Chehabist Union Party. While President Haddad was a Chehabist, he was noticeably more aligned with Islam than Christianity. In 1979, Lebanon was officially renamed to the Zakat Republic of Lebanon though in Christian circles it was referred to as the Caritian Republic of Lebanon[1]. 

President Haddad was succeeded by Salim Arslan, also a Chehabist, who delicately balanced the relations between the Christian and Muslim populations. Despite being a Zakat Republic, Lebanon refused to join the League for Arab Cooperation, instead joining the USA’s Alliance of Industrial Nations. Beirut became known as the “New York of the Arab World”, as many regional headquarters for multinational companies were located there before the city of Haya was finished in the UZE. The Beirut Stock Exchange also remained the primary financial hub for the Middle East, and while Haya tried for a while to usurp it, it never came close. 

When the Sinai War began, Lebanon remained neutral. They even made it a point to have their borders guarded by a coalition of both Muslim and Christian soldiers. But this did not save them. A fog of radioactive dust coated Lebanon, and refugees flooded the border to get away from the devastation in Jordan, Iraq, Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia. 

An emergency election was held right after the bombs dropped, and Karim Barakat was elected. He ran as an independent, though eventually gave birth to a political party known simply as “National Stability”. Barakat was remarkably humanitarian: assets of now defunct nations were nationalized and used to fund refugee camps and prop up welfare. The tiny Lebanese Army participated in several operations to protect other national governments from Qatifist rebels (such as the operation to protect the Saudi Crown Prince during the evacuation of Kharj) and the Lebanese Guard stayed in Mecca, including many Christian soldiers. 

Unfortunately, the social services of Lebanon were very quickly overwhelmed. Overcrowding and poor sanitation caused an outbreak of cholera, and radiation caused many to become infertile. Mass panic-buying led to government-enforced rationing. Pro-Egypt and Pro-Israeli protests dominated the politics of Lebanon for the rest of the summer, leading to nationwide martial law. One riot at a ration distribution center led to 56 dead refugees. Overworked soldiers began deserting their posts to protect their families. In Beirut, a housing project for Palestinian refugees was burned down by far-right Christian rebels. This provoked violence between the Christian and Muslim communities in the city. Shots were exchanged between local law enforcement and suspected Qatifists in late November, turning the city into a warzone. And finally, on January 7, 1989, President Barakat was assassinated by a Qatifist terrorist. 

Most of Lebanon fell during the wave of looting, rioting, and Qatifist terror. Some cities held on, usually protected by nearby military bases, while others were burnt to a crisp in the madness. Beirut was leveled by routine bombings in the summer of 1989, and what was left of the government relocated to Tripoli, where even there they struggled to keep looting to a minimum. And then, the cities became silent. Radioactive particles were everywhere: in the water, in the soil, in the dust and cobwebs, and very few places were spared. Refugees, citizens and soldiers alike began dying of acute radiation poisoning or from eating toxic rations. 

Things had fizzled out by late 1990, and surviving cities had become strongholds for the gaunt, skeletal figures that had yet to die from radiation poisoning. General Marwan Tabet, operating out of a military base near the ruins of Beirut, established the Emergency Auxiliary Regime of Lebanon. This organization could very loosely be called a government and its main day-to-day operations included such dreary tasks as attempting to humanely euthanize people exposed to radiation, surveying water tables for pockets of minimally contaminated water (everyone was infertile and dying of radiation anyway, just at different rates), distributing the stockpiles of rations that were still marginally safe for human consumption, and coordinate against Qatifists raids (which became less and less common as the years dragged on). This last task was what united many of the survivors. As they became less frequent, some cities left the alliance, though many retained friendly relations with Tripoli. 

A donation of 1 million kg of packaged food was airdropped to Lebanon by various Nordic countries in 1991, but most of the world ignored their plight. Agriculture was completely abandoned in 1994, as soil contamination and radioactive rain had permanently stunted the growth of all plants in Lebanon. Overall, this did not impact the survivors much. Less than 500,000 citizens remained, and every day people left in the hope of spending their last days somewhere better. 

In 2003, a group of far-right Christian warlords (commonly referred to as “Crusaders” by other survivor groups) ransacked the fragile confederacy of Lebanese city-states. General Tabet was hanged by an Italian raider, and Tripoli was burned to the ground. Mosques and synagogues were demolished across the wasteland. These raiders destroyed the last remaining strongholds of Lebanese civilization, before being destroyed themselves by the radiation saturating the water. 

Between 2003-2026, outside of a few isolated bunkers and outposts, Lebanon remained a desolate wasteland picked over by roving bands of Qatifists, Crusaders and Israeli Exiles. In 2007, a Qatifist militant attempted to destroy Mount Lebanon, though he failed. In 2015, wildfires burnt down much of the withered vegetation that still survived. In 2024, the radioactive salt particles from the Dead Sea rained down and permanently tainted the water tables in Lebanon.

As of 2027, the ruins of Lebanon are inhabited by a group of Syrian exiles and a few Crusader outposts, who routinely fight over the same pool of radioactive water. 
Syria

Official name: Zakat Republic of Syria
Capital: Damascus
Government Type: Presidential Republic
Population as of final census conducted: 36,013,784 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 600,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $4.08 Trillion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Alliance of Industrial Nations (until March 1988), League for Arab Cooperation (after March 1988)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Syria’s 1963 Ba’athist coup caused a major split in the Arab world, and was a significant step back from a united Arabia. For almost 10 years, diplomatic ties between Egypt and Syria remained on edge. This was exploited by the USA, with the Nixon administration viewing it very similarly to the Sino-Soviet Split. With the opulence and wealth resulting from the Shanghai Accords and practically pacifying East Asia and the Americas, the USA began to focus on creating a similar political and economic climate in the Middle East. The US’s heavy involvement in the Middle East in places like Bahrain, Lebanon, Iran and Syria were a testament to this. 

The US was Syria’s only option at this point, as China was too unstable, the USSR was still very pro-Egypt, and Egypt itself had felt extremely betrayed. So the Assad regime went full steam ahead with currying the USA for support. In 1969, Syria began to transition back into a somewhat faulty democracy. The Ba’athist party retained a majority of seats of course, and international observers cited the elections as free but not fair, but what could the USA do? The Middle East was very quickly becoming a tool for Moscow, and Washington couldn’t be that picky. 

That changed in 1972, when the USA and China signed the Shanghai Accords. This led to a total inversion of Cold War politics. With China’s assurances, the USA began to win in Vietnam, eventually turning into a stalemate. This was a massive morale boost for the West, and the USA was no longer scrambling to secure allies. Wars began to be fought with tariffs and trade negotiations, rather than soldiers and guns. With this, the Nixon Administration began to pressure President Hafez al-Assad to make elections more free and fair, and more importantly, make the country more stable and attractive to businesses. 

Seeing how lucrative things had gotten for the other nations in the Arab world, Assad turned down the authoritarianism of the Ba’athist party, instead allocating funds to infrastructure, education, and economic investments. This made Assad extremely popular, and he was subsequently reelected every single election, not by using intimidation or voter fraud, but because people began to genuinely believe in him. Syria saw almost $1 trillion USD in foreign investment between 1972 and 1988. Syrian oil often rivaled Iranian oil for how cheap and accessible it was. 

As the Arab world got gradually wealthier, they stopped being so hostile towards each other. Diplomatic ties were restored with Egypt on September 30, 1973, with President Karim al-Haddad and President Hafez al-Assad pledging renewed friendship between the two nations. Syria was invited to participate in the secret invasion of Israel before it was cancelled at the insistence of Moscow. 

Syria was the biggest importer of concrete and building materials in the Middle East. Massive, intricate elevated highways connected every major city, while opulent palaces, mansions and houses covered the countryside. Golf became a very popular sport in Syria. While Syria was not a financial beacon like the UZE or a banking paradise like Lebanon, it was still a very sizable market and as such, many companies around the world catered to the Syrian people. Some historians even claim that Syria saw the largest growth of the Middle Class during the Glorious Decades. 

Syria’s military remained well funded, as Assad was constantly worried that Iraq would invade them at the behest of Moscow. As part of a treaty signed with the Morgan Administration, the USA provided the Syrian army with modernized equipment. This forced the USSR to make a similar treaty regarding the defense of Iraq, and as such, caused some temporary hostility between the two superpowers. 

As the 1980s rolled around, Syria stood above their neighbors as by far the most wealthy and influential Arab nation. Syrian oil companies frequently engaged in trade wars with the Iranian counterparts, though they were very careful to not violate the Tehran Accords. The USA and China were Syria’s largest customers, and it was Syria’s refusal to sell their energy at equal rates that denied them a spot in the League for Arab Cooperation. 

While Syria’s elections remained flawed at best, with the Ba’athist party remaining by far the most popular and powerful party, numerous smaller fringe parties were created. These parties included the Arab Friendship Party, the Kurdish Party, the Communist Party, and the Financial Party. These parties rarely managed to win anything more than a local election, and when they did, it was only because the Ba’athists endorsed them. At the insistence of the rest of the Arab World, Syria was only renamed to a Zakat Republic in 1987. 

Of course, when the Egyptian Coalition revealed itself and threatened to invade Israel, the King Administration was baffled when Syria announced that they had joined the coalition. This resulted in the USA placing sanctions on Syria and pulling all of their foreign aid. When Syria refused to back down, they were kicked out of the Alliance of Industrial Nations. A few of the more wealthy members of Syrian society protested, but for the most part everyone was behind Assad and proud to stand with their Egyptian brothers again. 

Members of the Syrian Army joined Iraqi forces in both the Iranian Front and the Israeli Front. Syrian soldiers fought extra viciously, as Assad had promised them luxurious rewards if they performed well. Syrian forces mainly comprised armored divisions, foot soldiers, and artillery. The Syrian Navy also worked with the Egyptian Navy to form a blockade around Israel. 

For their ruthlessness, both Israel and Iran launched nukes at Syria. Damascus was destroyed, along with Aleppo and several other large cities. President al-Assad was killed in the blast, and the Ba’athist party collapsed into infighting. Qatifist revolutionaries then roamed the countryside, destroying the roadways and concrete monuments to Assad. Military bases were besieged by Qatifist militants, who then used the equipment to terrorize cities. 

In the West, a group of military police and special forces groups fought house by house, street by street and city by city to push back the Qatifist horde. These commanders, initially united in their struggle against the Qatifist rebels, quickly fractured into dozens of sub-factions based on almost every political ideology imaginable. These territories eventually became divided into city-states, centered around important industrial sites, farms, or military bases. 

Many fled on boat or by foot into Turkey or Greece, where they became refugees. However, by 1990, things were getting tough in Europe, and so Turkey started providing aid to some of the Syrian City-States. This caused another wave of infighting between the city-states and the Qatifist warlords, particularly over access to Lake Assad. Tabqa Dam was subsequently destroyed in 1992, causing a massive flood of radioactive water to destroy several settlements. 

As Turkey became increasingly militaristic, the coastal city-states began to fear a possible invasion from the north. By the late 90s, the Qatifists had started fighting each other more than the coastal states, as they disagreed on how certain technologies would have been viewed by The Founder. Some city states, like Latakia and Tartus, had set up scavenger-based economies where they prowled the Mediterranean for valuable scrap and sold it to places like Libya, the Federation, or Greece in exchange for food, fuel, and weapons. This led to the creation of several jury-rigged desalination machines along the coast. These coastal cities then used the distribution of water to gain influence on the other, more inland city-states. 

By the time of the Red Summer, Latakia and Tartus became so influential that they practically controlled the ruins of Syria. Around this time, a group of radical Christian Warlords attacked the coast of Lebanon, Syria, and Israel. While they were successful in wiping out the remnants of the Lebanese government, they were not so successful in Syria. The people in Syria fought back, but some of the outer cities fell to the Crusaders before they succumbed to poisoned, irradiated water or were killed by Islamic warlords. 

Latakia and Tartus made an alliance and rallied the rest of the city states to build a series of fortifications along the Jabal al-Ansariya mountain range. These efforts ended up leaving them wide open to an attack from the north, as the situation in the 90s inverted and millions of Turkic refugees began flooding the city states. This forced the biggest of the remaining cities (Latakia, Tartus, Idlib and Hama) to finally unite into a defense-based confederacy, known as the Wadi League. Latakia and Tartus remained the undisputed leaders, and frequently tried to undermine the other. Idlib and Hama on the other hand were entirely dependent on the water and trade from the coastal states, and served as the closest thing to a breadbasket in the ruins of Syria. 

Trade along the Mediterranean dried up as Greece and Turkey fell to civil war, the Federation became increasingly totalitarian, and the last states in North Africa collapsed. By 2011, the Wadi Fleet stopped acting as a merchant fleet and instead became a heavily militarized group of nautical scavengers, whose primary goal was to keep the desalination machines running. As the heat got worse, farms were moved into underground greenhouses made in the ruins of sewer tunnels (which ironically became quite rich in nutrients for the plants and acted as a great fertilizer) and lit by tiny, grated holes barred with rebar. 

Soil was another thing the Wadi Fleet gathered. While Syria was not nuked as badly as Jordan, Israel, or other nations, radioactive dust storms had corrupted much of the land in Syria. Underground soil was rotated and disposed of when it was determined it was unsuitable to grow crops on, though during the Purple Summer of 2011 the supply of new soil had gotten so low that many in the Hama state starved. There are hints of cannibalism during major famines, but no evidence has been found. 

By the 2020s, the Euphrates had completely dried up, turning into empty riverbeds filled with skeletons and salt. The last of the Islamic warlords had either fled north or died out. The Wadi League became completely centered on the cultivation and purification of water, with some of the younger Syrians born after the War starting a cult born out of reverence for the almost ritual way water from the sea was purified and transported to the outer cities. 

The seas only became rougher as time marched on. Tartus was destroyed in a massive flood in late 2022, with Latakia leading the organized effort to rebuild it. This new Tartus was notably less influential in the League, and Latakia became the undisputed leader. Fires and dust storms in 2023 and 2024 caused a shift away from making crummy, easily fixable hovels and shanty towns and instead repurposing existing concrete and stone ruins. This took place during the Second Great Heatwave, and many died during the restoration of the stone houses. Many of those that died were those displaced from Tartus, which further solidified Latakia’s grip on the League. 

In the mid 2020s, excursions from the southern Crusader states and Israeli raiders plagued the League. This led to the Battle of Hama in 2025, where the League Militia fought off a band of almost 10,000 Israeli raiders and lost only 3,000 men. The Solar Flare of 2026 devastated the Wadi League, causing a severe drop in water desalination. This escalated into a civil war pitting Latakia against the others. 

As of 2027, the Wadi League Civil War is raging on, with Latakia desperately trying to fix their desalination plants to regain their influence over the region. They lose more ground everyday, and it seems that the Idlib Militia is poised to become the new power in the area. 
Libya

Official name: Great Zakat Republic of Arab Libya (until 2002), Libyan State (2002-2010, disputed), Libyan Emergency Government (2002-2011, disputed)
Capital: Tripoli (until 2002), Tripoli (until 2010, disputed), Benghazi (2002-2011, disputed)
Government Type: Far-Left Dictatorship (until 2002), Center-left Confederation (2002-2010, disputed), Authoritarian Military Dictatorship (2002-2011, disputed)
Population as of final census conducted: 8,472,374 (circa 2000)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 4,800,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.5 Trillion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES
Alignment: COMECON
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Libya was the only country that participated in the Sinai War that lasted long enough to not only join the Alliance of Nations, but survive into the new millennium. Libya made a lot of money selling oil to the Warsaw Pact and other communist nations, but when China was taken over by Chen, Muammar Gaddafi refused to sign the Shanghai Accords. Libya only signed the Tehran Accords in 1980, at the insistence of the other Arab nations. Finally, after much debate with the new leaders in Moscow, the Shanghai Accords were signed in 1985. Libya still prioritized their communist brethren but became very rich selling oil to the ever-hungry China. 

While Libya was technically a Zakat state, having it added to their name in 1986, the country did not experience the extensive liberalization that many other Arab nations did during the Glorious Decades. Libya was firmly in Moscow’s sphere of influence and neither Beijing nor Washington tried to change that. Gaddafi remained the sole head of state, kept in power by the military. The welfare state was heavily scaled towards those loyal to Gaddafi - those most loyal to him (mainly in the military) got mansions and a stipend to spend on whatever they wanted, while the average citizen had a decent quality of life and suspected traitors were outright denied welfare, instead laboring on farms or in factories. 

What Gaddafi said was law, and any who questioned this either wound up lying dead in a ditch somewhere or breaking their back on a labor farm. Some of his supporters in the military even created vast, seemingly pointless public work projects for the sole purpose of working laborers to death. One of these projects included expanding the Great Manmade River to encompass every major city in the Sahara. Desalination plants provided clean drinking water for the citizens on the coast, which was then piped off to the interior of the country. 

In part to Soviet aid (mainly given as a way to keep Libya allied with Moscow and not changing sides), Gaddafi was allowed to enact a great many socialist reforms. Minimum wage tripled between 1972-1988, and rent was reduced by as much as 60% in some places. The coastal cities hired Soviet architects that turned them into towering testaments to the glories of socialism, and were very similar to the Soviet Worker’s Palaces. Tripoli became notable as the home to the largest statue of Gamal Abdel Nasser in the world. Like Tunisia, Libya was also a very popular vacation spot for Soviets and other members of the Eastern Bloc. As relations with the West warmed, the coast of Libya also became a popular destination for Italians and West Germans. Benghazi in particular became a popular meeting spot for West and East Germans. “I’ll meet you in Medina” became a common euphemism for this. 

Libya participated in the Sinai War not so much out of the desire to liberate the Sinai from Israel, but simply because Gaddafi wanted to show solidarity with Moscow-aligned Iraq and Egypt. Gaddafi remained paranoid however, and only sent a token force to participate in the operations in Sinai. For the most part, Libya helped enforce the blockade around Israel and Iran. Libya’s Armed Forces were kept on high alert and this is what allowed them to intercept and shoot down the Israeli missiles before they destroyed any Libyan cities. 

Gaddafi considered the Sinai War to be a complete failure, and seeing the Qatifist-led revolutions sparking across the Middle East, he closed the eastern borders of Libya. The navy was recalled and instead patrolled the coast, ensuring the desalination plants remained active. Gaddafi had rightfully predicted that water would soon become a resource to be fought over, and further closed down the borders of the nation. Claiming it was to protect against ideological and physiological corruption, mobile “Territory Defense Units” were organized and began to actively shoot any incoming refugees. 

Libya’s economy very quickly collapsed and Gaddafi was forced to undo many of his welfare policies, resulting in a sharp decline of living standards. Those in the military or working essential jobs were prioritized, but everyone else was pretty much on their own. Evacuations throughout the 90s moved people further and further inward until 99.9% of the population lived in Tripolitania. Libya became extremely authoritarian and repressive. Those suspected of harboring refugees or hoarding supplies were executed. Extra water rations were offered for providing the authorities any information about subversives. 

In May 1989, Prime Minister Mourad Kassar of Tunisia fled the country and landed in Libya. Gaddafi kept him around as an insurance policy, and also as a way to control Tunisia once the dust had settled. Kassar managed to convince Gaddafi (who was overworked and stressed at the time) that he had just been privatizing Tunisia’s government as a demonstration of how bad capitalism was, and that socialism was always going to be the future. Still, Gaddafi did not trust him, and had him watched at all times. He was always treated better than many citizens and Gaddafi frequently talked with him, trying to groom him into being a puppet for the eventual annexation of Tunisia. 

When the United Nations collapsed, Gaddafi followed Moscow’s example and did not join the Alliance of Nations until all the way in 2002. Gaddafi remained active in COMECON, being one of the last remaining nations to do so, and frequently attended economic conferences in Moscow, Buenos Aires, and Mexico City. Libya was given extra funding by the Soviets as they served as an example of a country that had not given in to Western temptations, and had remained a socialist country even after the introduction of the Shanghai and Tehran Accords. In 2001, Gaddafi even hosted a COMECON meeting in Benghazi. 

While out in Moscow in December of 2002, Gaddafi’s government was overthrown in a popular revolution that spiraled into a civil war. Kassar was killed in the fighting, along with several prominent Gaddafi loyalists. At the insistence of Minister Voronin Gaddafi remained in Moscow, where he had become a political tool very similar to his own plans for Kassar. 

The Red Summer of 2003 turned the Civil War into a stalemate. Libya became divided into two camps: the Libyan State, claiming to be a decentralized, egalitarian socialist confederacy of various large cities, industrial sites and farms. The other side was a group of Gaddafi loyalists that held out in the Jebel Akhdar around Benghazi led by Colonel Faris al-Marwani. The Tripoli Confederacy had a much larger population than the Benghazi Remnant, but because the Benghazi Remnant had most of the leftover military equipment, they were roughly matched. 

Skirmishes and raids were conducted between the two proto-states in the ever-widening no man’s land. The Great Manmade River was destroyed by the Loyalist forces in 2004, and after some loyalists defected, the Loyalists and Rebels had several naval battles in the Gulf of Sidra. In 2008, Benghazi was almost seized by the rebels but were saved at the last moment by a nearby Soviet fleet. Voronin promised that once the rebels had been dealt with, Gaddafi would be restored to power. This caused the fighting to renew, however the Soviets had unknowingly spread the Red Flu to the Loyalists, who then spread it to the Rebels on the battlefield. 

The Rebels finally sued for peace in late 2009, and the two sides were in the process of reuniting when a large army of desperate refugees from the United Arab Republic of the Nile attempted to overwhelm Libya’s coast to get access to their rusting desalination plants. The Loyalists did their best to fight off the invaders, but Tripoli was sacked and burned to the ground in early 2010. The refugee army then took over the remaining naval craft and tried to sail across to Italy, where they were promptly blown to bits by the Federation Navy. Benghazi fared slightly better, fighting to the death to defend their desalination plant, but a storm in 2011 caused the city to finally fall and was destroyed in the chaos. Records also indicate that Gaddafi was unceremoniously killed during one of Savateev’s purges in 2012. 

By the time of the Great Heatwave of 2015, the refugees had become little more than raiders and pirates. A settlement called “New Cairo” was built around the last working desalination plant. The native libyans were worked to the bone by their new masters, though the refugees (made up of Egyptians, Sudanese, Syrians, Palestinians, and Iraqi, among others) constantly bickered with each other over the division of resources. Starvation, drought and famine killed many during this time. 

Between 2017-2027, two major uprisings were launched against the invaders, and both times, the Libyans were beaten back into submission. Suicides and deaths from pollution hollowed the population further. Cannibalism became openly practiced, with some warlords taking great delight in eating a Libyan family, one by one, and making their relatives watch. 

The Second Great Heatwave of 2023 finally caused the fragile alliance to fracture, and the warlords, raiders and pirates split along national lines. An Egyptian pirate ended up dominating the ruins around Tripoli, while Sudanese and Iraqi pirates both fought for control around the ruins of Benghazi. The ruins of Greece and Turkey were frequently plundered by these pirates. In 2025, the Egyptian pirate tried to launch a raid into the Constantine Confederacy but was beaten back by the Tunisians. 

After the Solar Flare of 2026 and the desalination plant stopped working, the three pirate factions significantly ramped up their operations. The Wadi League engaged in several naval battles with them, while the Crusader states in Lebanon were sacked. 

As of 2027, the Libyans are planning another uprising and will succeed or die trying. The Sudanese and Iraqi pirates have made a temporary alliance and plan on invading Egyptian Tripoli, believing that they have some secret stash of water hidden away. 
Kuwait

Official name: Zakat State of Kuwait
Capital: Kuwait City
Government Type: Constitutional Monarchy
Population as of final census conducted: 5,096,827 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 900,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.06 Trillion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: League for Arab Cooperation
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Part of Saddam Hussein’s deal with Moscow stipulated that he could endanger the USSR’s foreign relations with the Middle East. The formation of Bahrain into the first syndicalist government in the world was promising but not what the Soviet Union desired. Moscow needed to present the image of a gentle, guiding hand leading the world towards communism, and the dictatorships in Libya and Iraq did not help this. Saddam refrained from antagonizing Kuwait, but Iran kept the country at arm’s length. Iran viewed the country as beneath them, and not worth the trouble to take any serious military action against, and thus Kuwait was more or less left alone by its more antagonistic neighbors. 

Kuwait became a cultural center for the Middle East, especially in regards to poetry and cinema. Kuwait City held a royal Poetry Symposium every year, where the best writers from around the Arab world would gather and read their works to the Emir. Those that won were printed by the Royal Press of Kuwait and distributed across the world. 

At the insistence of the West, and strangely Iraq, Kuwait opened up even more politically and the Emir became a ceremonial position. Part of Saddam’s demands were that the fringe communist party be recognized as legal. This confused the West, but they let it slide - it was the 1980s, and communism was seen as on its way out. This tiny communist party fractured further, and by 1988, it only held 4 members, all of whom were just edgy students at the University of Kuwait. 

In 1983, Kuwait joined the League for Arab Cooperation, and the socialist president, Sami al-Mutairi, officially renamed it to the Zakat State of Kuwait. While Kuwait wasn’t as lucrative of a market as other nations in the region, it was viewed as the most stable, and thus they still had a decent amount of foreign investors. Kuwait also became known as the “Hollywood of Arabia”, or less kindly as “Los Arabia”. The biggest Arabic movie of the Glorious Decades, “The Nile Runs Red”, premiered in Kuwait City on April 6, 1987. It was a biopic about the life of T.E. Lawrence and how he inspired the Arab Revolt against the Ottomans, however it was dripping with subtext that not only implied that T. E. Lawrence was no better than the Ottomans, it also drew many parallels to the current political climate. Some critics even claimed that it portrayed the Arab Revolt as unsuccessful and that another would be necessary. What few can deny is that in the Arab world, military enlistment skyrocketed. 

When the Sinai War broke out, Kuwait’s government debated back and forth against joining the war on the side of the Iranians or on the side of the rest of the Arab world. Kuwait attempted to remain neutral, but finally placed sanctions on Israel in June 1988. The sanctions didn’t really do much, as they were more symbolic than anything, and Kuwait avoided being destroyed in a nuclear hellfire. 

But this did nothing to save them. Radioactive dust storms blew in from the ruins of Jordan and Iraq. A state of emergency was declared and the tiny Kuwaiti military mobilized to defend their borders, only to be quickly overwhelmed with waves of refugees from Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Jordan and Syria. The Emir and the President were both assassinated by Qatifist rebels when they attempted to flee to Pakistan. All the leaders of the rapidly fraying Kuwaiti military met similar fates. 

By August of 1988, Kuwait had ceased to exist as a nation. The relatively undamaged infrastructure in Kuwait City, along with its access to the sea, provided a tantalizing prize that warlords around the region fought over. Some of them were former members of the Jordanian Army, others were Iraqi border security, and one was even reported to be a Sudanese truck driver. 

Throughout the 90s, Kuwait became the stronghold of many despots and warlords. A revolution would depose the current warlord, then this new regime would expand into the wasteland to scavenge for supplies, only to inevitably overextend and collapse from another coup. Many died from violence, starvation, radiation and drought, but because of the massive oil fires cutting Iraq and northern Saudi Arabia in half, Kuwait was the only place people could go to. The Soviet occupation of Iran had turned the Zagros Mountains into an impassable barrier, while Pakistan’s navy had become increasingly violent with a “shoot first, ask questions later” policy.  

And yet, millions poured into Kuwait every single year, in an attempt to get a boat and to sail to somewhere, anywhere that was better than the hell on earth they were experiencing. Sewage-based farms, similar to the ones in Syria, attempted to keep the survivors in Kuwait fed but chronic famines led to cannibalism to be normalized. 

In 2002, after Pakistan and India destroyed each other, a large amount of rusted boats and hand-made rafts arrived in Kuwait, carrying almost 100,000 Pakistani refugees. This caused a major upset in the balance of power in Kuwait, which at this point had been divided into several “wards” roughly organized along national lines and run by groups of former soldiers who amounted to petty gangsters. The Bahraini Defense Force, a poorly named group of militants that controlled the docks, allowed the refugees to stay as long as they built their homes on the outskirts of the city. 

The city continued to expand outwards, creating millions of ramshackle hovels that would fall apart every sandstorm and burn down in fires. Eventually, the city was a loose confederation of refugee states. Iraqi, Syrian, Iranian, Kuwaiti, Saudi, Bahraini, Qatari, Pakistani, Indian, Turkish… the list went on. Kuwait became the place for people with nowhere else to go. Kuwait eventually became so powerful that even the raiders and warlords stopped attacking the place, and were allowed to conduct business and use the brothels as long as they didn’t cause a scene. The Scrap Bazaar of Sabah Al Salem Stadium was the best place to barter for metals on that side of the Great Iraqi Fire, and the Dust Island (formerly Green Island) grew the best food in the area, when they could. 

In 2005, an Iranian chemist and former employee of the Imperial Persian Oil Company (IPOC) by the name of Dr. Layth al-Harqan began an ambitious project to create a series of desalination stations around the coastline. There was still some minor radioactivity in the water, but at least it wasn’t full of salt and other pollutants. These desalination plants initially caused some tension between the wards until one was completed for all of them. They were very delicate however and required weekly cleaning or else the water produced was just a thin trickle of brownish sludge. Entire teams of scavengers made their living off providing repair materials for the life-giving water systems. 

In the 2010s, as relations between the wards all became warmer and people stopped fighting over water and food as much, some of the community leaders even proposed the idea of a “survivor’s council” which functioned very similarly to the United Nations (by this point, each of the wards were their own microstate, with a distinct language, culture, ethnicity and shack-building style). 

The idea took a while to catch on, finally being created in 2016 as a way to better coordinate scavenger teams to keep the desalination plants running. In 2017, a united militia was also created to help repel an invasion of raiders. This confederacy never had a formal name and was frequently referred to as just “the council”. These two unified efforts remained the only ways the microstates cooperated, as distribution of food, water, and building materials could never be agreed upon. Any attempt of a formal leader never worked either, and so Council City had, at one point, 27 mayors. 

In the 2020s, the environment itself became the greatest threat to the fragile stability of Council City. At times, lethal heat made it deadly to go outside even during the night. Sandstorms in 2021 caused the desalination plants of almost every ward to malfunction, leading to a massive water riot where 6,000 were killed. Flooding caused landslides and sinkholes. A massive storm in 2023 caused Kuwait Towers to collapse into the sea, killing over 70,000. In 2025 the heat had gotten so bad that it became lethal to attempt to leave the city by land, and all scavenging operations were forced to use boats and comb the coast of Iran. The Solar Flare of 2026 did not affect the city much, as the desalination plants were already primitive and the fixes had been done many times already. Many were confused on why they broke down without a sandstorm, though. 

As of 2027, Council City is limping day by day, if a little more hungry, a little more thirsty, a little more violent, and a little more hopeless than the last. Political conflict is all but extinct, and more people everyday choose to take the easy way out rather than waiting for a slow, painful death from starvation, dehydration or radiation. 
Qatar

Official name: Kingdom of Qatar
Capital: Doha
Government Type: Islamic Absolute Monarchy
Population as of final census conducted: 4,284,135 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: Uninhabitable
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $426 Billion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Unaligned
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Qatar would have been poised to join the ranks of the wealthy Zakat republics. Emir Ahmad bin Ali Al Thani was quite unpopular with his people, and various factions within his government were working with foreign powers (namely the British) to potentially rectify this. Unfortunately, this attempt at deposing the Emir was unsuccessful. 

Qatar became the black sheep of the Arab world - sure, it was relatively prosperous, but there was no welfare net and government spending was kept to a minimum. Law enforcement and security forces prevented any uprisings, but even then, peace was enforced by gunpoint. Because of how the wealth was distributed, the average citizen saw very little economic prosperity. Outside of the nobility and their cronies, the people of Qatar were very poor. Many left the nation to go work for other Arab states and sent their money back home to their families. 

Much of the most bizarre artwork created during the Glorious Decades originated in Qatar. The Qatari nobles had very peculiar tastes, and prided themselves on spending obscene amounts of money to commission nonsensical projects from controversial artists, for the sake of holding world records. Tourism did take off in Qatar, though it was not as popular of a place to visit simply because tourists didn’t like seeing 15 starving kids on their way to see the World’s Largest Chair. 

Some of the projects bordered on torture, like an intensive banana farm in the middle of the desert, staffed entirely by government officials who participated in the failed uprising in 1972. The bananas reportedly tasted quite sour, and almost 600 barrels of water were used everyday to keep the plantation from drying out. In 1977 the Qatari government announced that they had finished creating a replica 1:4 scale Mount Rushmore, floating on a manmade island in the middle of the Persian Gulf. But instead of US Presidents, the heads on the replica were all members of the royal family. The artist who designed it skimped on a lot of the building costs, as by the early 1980s the island had begun to fall apart, but the artist was safely in Liechtenstein by then. 

The Emir didn’t really participate much in world politics, instead just sitting around and creating the world’s largest sandcastle. By February of 1988, much of the government of Qatar had grown dissatisfied with the way Qatar was progressing in comparison to the other nations of the Arab world. As the Egyptian Coalition ramped up their aggression towards Israel and Iran, Qatifist missionaries appeared in Qatar. Civil unrest gradually ramped up as people demanded better living conditions and to help their brothers in their struggle with Israel. Demonstrations turned to protests, which turned into riots, and finally on June 6, 1988, right before the bombs dropped, Qatar collapsed into civil war. 

The Qatari Civil War was extremely bloody and brutal. Government corruption and fears of an uprising similar to this one had caused the Emir to massively defund the police and military, with only his most loyal soldiers given working guns. As such, the rebels fought with sticks, knives and their bare fists. But eventually the Emir’s forces ran out of ammo and some of them surrendered. The Emir was found and hung from a lamppost on June 28, 1988. 

And yet that was not the end of the anarchy - waves upon waves of refugees fleeing the nuclear devastation swarmed the ruins of Qatar, and stifled any attempt at an organized government. Qatifist militants destroyed the many absurd projects and bands of looters stole whatever they could. The Qatari that survived fled however they could, be it by boat or foot. Some ended up in Kuwait or Hejaz but many died in the desert. 

By the 2000s, the last survivors in Qatar had died of starvation or radiation poisoning. Some of the larger projects and works of art still stood as they were not able to be destroyed by the increasingly primitive Qatifists. In the 2010s, the ruins of Qatar became avoided by survivors for being “cursed”, eventually turning into a macabre time capsule of what architecture was popular during the Glorious Decades. 

As of 2027, Qatar is an uninhabitable wasteland, slowly being absorbed by the radioactive desert. 
Oman

Official name: Zakat Sultanate of Oman
Capital: Muscat
Government Type: Islamic Absolute Monarchy
Population as of final census conducted: 6,502,702 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 260,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $961.3 Billion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: League for Arab Cooperation
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

Inspired by the liberal reforms happening all across the Arab world, Qaboos bin Said deposed his father and became the Sultan of Oman. Combined with China’s ever-lasting greed for fossil fuels and a rapid increase to the GDP, Sultan Bin Said created a generous welfare net and significantly increased spending in education, social services and healthcare. Oman became so prosperous that many of the rebels in Dhofar surrendered and rejoined Omani society. The Sultan set a deadline for the rebels: lay down your arms by December 31, 1973 and receive full amnesty. 

Many of the rebels, seeing the dramatic increase to standard of living, took this offer. A few holdouts remained (mainly along the border with South Yemen) but an international coalition of Lebanese, Iranian and Syrian soldiers wiped them out by April of 1974. 

In 1980, Oman was renamed to the Zakat Sultanate of Oman, but other than that not much happened in the state. Oman was regarded as a quiet place for elderly Arabs to retire to. There were no large resorts, no extravagant art projects. Omani cinema and literature was not regarded as visionary, but neither was it regarded as drab or dull. Many young people chose to emigrate to the more lively Arab nations like Syria, Lebanon and Kuwait, leaving behind a politely aging population. Other than migrant workers and international students (Omani universities were considered to be the best in the Arab peninsula) only the elderly remained in Oman, and they were content with that. 

As the Sinai War ramped up, the Sultan expressed his support for the Egyptian Coalition but did not send any aid or even sanction Israel. “Oman stands with Egypt”, was all he would say when asked to comment. 

Oman was spared from being directly hit from any nukes, but they still felt the after effects. Most of the smog and dust from the war ended up concentrated in the skies above Oman. It was reported that in Muscat, the sun was not seen until sometime in mid-April of 1990. Everything was coated with a thick layer of vaguely glowing orange dust. Water rationing was enacted in July of 1988, and the government continually advised the population to stay indoors. Gasmasks or face coverings were required when going outside. 

Oman was also spared the wrath of the Qatifists, as their aging population prevented the movement from taking off in their borders. Their comparatively simple cities with minimal monuments also prevented any outside incursions by Qatifists. Instead, Oman was swarmed with refugees from the UZE, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen. A few Iranian boats even crossed the Gulf of Oman and fled to Muscat. 

The Sultan attempted to be generous and allow as many of the refugees in as he could, but rapidly deteriorating living conditions and spillover from the Yemeni War caused the social services to quickly become overwhelmed and the government folded under the pressure. Sultan Qaboos bin Said was pronounced dead on October 19, 1988 having died from a mixture of radiation poisoning and pollution related causes. This resulted in a succession crisis as the government was torn between helping the increasing number of refugees or intervening in the Yemeni War. 

Oman spiraled into chaos as the remnants of the government had a “cold” civil war. No one actively fought each other, but every high-ranking minister, general or mayor claimed that they were the interim leader of Oman and that everyone else wasn’t taking the role seriously. The country became more and more divided as some of the local government refused to allow in refugees, with some even resorting to shooting them, and others attempted to send aid to North Yemen. The country only devolved further and entire local governments collapsed into anarchy due to riots, uprisings, or simply running out of social services. Those that could leave fled into South Yemen or attempted to sail to Pakistan. 

By the Hot Summer of 1990, any resemblance of a government was gone. Anarchy reigned across Oman. Gangs of refugees banded together into bandits and terrorized the aging population before many succumbed to dehydration, radiation or the sands. Sometime between 2001 and 2003, the last able-bodied survivors left in Oman retreated to the northern mountains and eventually joined the Fujairah Group. Throughout the first quarter of the 21st Century, Oman was frequently picked over by scavengers and other survivors before being completely abandoned sometime after the Second Great Heatwave of 2023. 

As of 2027, Oman is a radioactive cemetery. Only a small outpost in Fujairah remains. 
North Yemen

Official name: Yemen Arab Republic
Capital: Sanaa
Government Type: Far-Right Dictatorship
Population as of final census conducted: 25,379,600 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 40,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.41 Million USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: World Prosperity Alliance
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

The two Yemens remained rather isolated and poor nations - North Yemen more so than their southern neighbor. Initially, the recently deposed monarch received aid from Saudi Arabia and Jordan but that dried up by the end of the 1960s. The new Yemen Arab Republic was formed. 

This new nation was plagued with instability, corruption, and further political infighting. Even Saudi Arabia stopped providing aid for them as Saudi money had an uncanny habit of disappearing into the pockets of high-ranking military officers. The inability of the central government to effectively govern the region led to another coup and a group of far-right militants deposed the democratically elected President, promising to reform the country properly. This was followed by the dictator being assassinated just a few years later, and finally, a group of three rather authoritarian statesmen banded together and realized that North Yemen would forever remain the laughing stock of the world if they didn’t get the country functioning. 

In 1981, North Yemen turned towards the only nation that took them seriously anymore: China. China had wanted to gain more influence in the Arab world and so set out to revitalize the infrastructure of North Yemen. Oil refineries and factories were built with Chinese money, in exchange for China building a few military bases in the region. The USSR, seeing what China was doing, then sent boatloads of aid to South Yemen and heavily militarized the border. 

Unfortunately, due to the heavy pollution that North Yemeni factories produced, the country remained on the sidelines of the Arab world. In 1985, the Executive Chairman of the North Yemen Transitional Government was assassinated due to public dissatisfaction from how the domestic situation had been handled, and he was quickly replaced by a pro-Chinese businessman. He proved to be a very weak and ineffectual leader, and when the Sinai War rolled around, he struggled to keep the country together. 

China initially provided support and security to keep North Yemen in line, but by August of 1988 they had completely pulled out and had left them to their fate. Hordes of refugees escaping the nuclear devastation crossed the border while native Yemeni tried to escape, knowing how bad things were there already. Some tried to reach their families in South Yemen by crossing over into Oman while others escaped into Saudi Arabia. 

Sometime in December of 1988, things got so bad that yet another coup took over the remnants of the nation, this time by an ambitious general who rallied what was left of the armed forces for an invasion of South Yemen. It failed horribly, with the last remnants of the North Yemeni government crumbling apart by April of 1989. North Yemen quickly fractured into a mosaic of microstates reminiscent of the Holy Roman Empire, and remained that way for several years. Some of the microstates eked out a living selling crude oil to nearby states, while others survived on raiding and pillaging. 

In 1994, the remnants of the Saudi military invaded the mountains in Yemen in an attempt to create a new Saudi kingdom. The Qatifists, warlords, and bandits were easy pickings for the battle-hardened Saudi soldiers and they pacified the area quickly. This new Saudi kingdom was ruled by the last member of the Saudi royal family, King Saud V, and it soon became clear that many of the Saudi soldiers had missed being in power. Many of the survivors in Yemen had accepted being serfs to roving bands of violent men but a few banded together and resisted. When it was discovered that the Saudis were unfairly distributing rations from old Chinese military bases and hoarding wells, an uprising toppled the occupying force. King Saud V was killed in a bombing that created a landslide and resulted in an estimated 500 extra deaths. The Saudis retreated and once again North Yemen fell to anarchy. 

The Red Summer of 2003 and the Purple Summer of 2011 both took their toll on North Yemen’s fractured, feudal society. Fiefdoms and khanates rose and fell, many lasting less than a year. Radiation, smoke, and pollution forced the survivors further and further up the mountains. Chinese factories and military bases became routinely picked over by both North and South Yemeni survivors. 

By the time of the Great Heatwave of 2015, only the hardiest, most resourceful survivors remained, concentrated in tiny enclaves at the peaks of mountains or in isolated strongholds. Trading had kept them alive for now but everyone was quickly running out of water. Nearby survivors in Hejaz offered them some of their water and a deal was worked out, where North Yemeni survivors would help the Hejazi scavenge for materials to trade to the Ethiopians. 

As the two communities grew closer, they eventually signed a formal treaty of cooperation and North Yemen joined Hejaz after the Second Great Heatwave of 2023. To help coordinate scavenging missions, the many survivor communities were organized into several communes based on where they were in relation to the mountains. Almost 5 decades of constant civil war, corruption and anarchy had made the North Yemeni extremely durable and adaptable survivors, and as such became some of Hejaz’s best scouts and scavengers. 

As of 2027, North Yemen is working very closely with their Hejazi allies to ensure the Quran is not forgotten. 
South Yemen

Official name: People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen (until 1993), Yemeni Emergency Regime (1993-2003)
Capital: Aden
Government Type: Far-Left Communist State (until 1993), Far-Left Military Junta (1993-2003)
Population as of final census conducted: 29,760,901 (circa 1990)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 300,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $14.97 Billion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: COMECON (until 1993), unaligned (1993-2003)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

South Yemen remained a minor state in Moscow’s sphere of influence until the 1980s, when China and the USSR began trying to outdo the other. China’s spending in the Northern state forced the USSR to spend ludicrous amounts of money building up the southern state’s infrastructure, military, education, healthcare and welfare systems. After the USSR began to liberalize this cascaded further into a relatively rich and open communist state. Free speech and freedom of expression remained restricted but the government became marginally more democratic and immigration laws were significantly relaxed. 

Abdul Fattah Ismail remained in power and kept the nation stable in the immediate aftermath of the Sinai War. He had voiced his support for the Egyptian Coalition but did not place any sanctions or offer aid in any way. At the request of Voronin, South Yemen had actually been building up their military to eventually invade and annex North Yemen to turn it into a land purified from China’s influence and to unite all Yemeni people under the banner of communism. They did not have to wait long, as the remnants in North Yemen attempted to invade the south. The communist forces beat them back with ease, and also began to patrol their borders to keep out refugees. Due to the rampant spread of the Qatifist movement, Ismail’s government deemed refugees to be a security risk and thus heavily regulated the flow of immigrants. On May 19, 1989, a border checkpoint near Dhula was destroyed in a bombing. The perpetrators were never found. 

Over the summer of 1989, South Yemen gradually repealed many of their reforms they had conducted throughout the 1980s. In the name of national security, elections were suspended and a curfew was enacted. Rationing was introduced in large metropolitan cities. As Ismail’s government became more and more authoritarian, this caused civil unrest to gradually ramp up. Paranoia due to Qatifist violence resulted in some large cities outlawing mosques and organized religion (in the past, the communist government had turned a blind eye to it as long as it wasn’t too obnoxious). 

The Hot Summer of 1990 put South Yemen to the test. Radiation, smog, sandstorms and rebel activity all cascaded into the worst famine seen in centuries. Still, the government massaged the statistics so that things didn’t seem that bad. Hundreds of farms turned to dust as the once-arable land became tainted with salt and radioactive sand, bankrupting many farmers and further taking up resources in the rapidly shrinking budget. Ismail stepped down in October of 1990 due to stress and health-related issues and was replaced by his Minister for the Interior, Nadir al-Ashmari. 

Secretary al-Ashmari proved to be even less popular than Ismail had become but he remained resolute, rigid and dedicated to the goal of keeping Yemen together. All private property was seized by the government and all remaining businesses were nationalized. The unemployed were required to take exams determining their health and fitness, with many of them being reassigned to either be soldiers or to work in the new collectivized farms springing up in the grasslands in Lower Yemen. Those that were seen as unfit were given extremely mundane desk jobs with minimal rations as a way to discourage citizens from purposely failing their exams. 

While the USSR attempted to provide them with aid whenever they could, South Yemen’s location made it very difficult. Soviet fleets were busy participating in the Yugoslavian War and air drops could only be made sparingly. Between 1990 and 1993, the Soviet Union only managed to send 5 shipments of aid to the hardworking communists in South Yemen. 

In short, they were on their own. 

Almost 5 million died of pollution, radiation, dehydration and famine between 1990-1993. The country was being held together by overwhelming force alone. The soldiers in the Yemeni Army enjoyed extra privileges to keep them from rebelling and many of them took to bullying citizens for fun. Corruption and bribes flourished, and a small underground black market was established. Supplies and resources were mismanaged or just disappeared into the pockets of corrupt officials. 

This caused Secretary al-Ashmari to become extremely unpopular, with strikes and protests rocking the political landscape in 1993. It all stopped when their northern neighbor was invaded by the Saudi Remnants, and several high ranking members of the military used this as an excuse to take control of the government. Secretary al-Ashmari was killed by firing squad and the entire country was placed under permanent martial law. 

This “Yemeni Emergency Regime” frequently clashed with groups of workers who had had enough and wanted better living conditions. Those that survived were sent to work to death in a labor camp. Citizens suspected of harboring “pro-Western thoughts about the myth of good working conditions” had their rations reduced and those loyal to the military were given the best rations. Officers traded female laborers like a currency, and discrete pleasure houses for off-duty soldiers sprung up across the wilderness. 

To their credit, the military junta did protect the borders from groups of roving bandits, Qatifists, and raiders. Aden was almost destroyed in 1995 when a group of Somali refugees and pirates attempted to burn it down. The Junta ordered an evacuation and they were largely successful in it, which boosted their public image for a time. 

Due to the amount of resources required to keep them livable, the outer regions of the state were gradually abandoned throughout the late 90s, until by 2000 the Hadhramaut was completely abandoned. Some groups of rebels would stay and attempt to eke out a life in the abandoned regions but they never survived long. Sandstorms caused farms to gradually be moved to greenhouses or to underground areas, significantly lowering the amount of available food. The various members of the military junta began to bicker and quarrel about the allocation of important resources and the alliance almost fell apart twice. 

The Red Summer of 2003 finally caused it to come crashing down as the officer in charge of each city waged war on each other over the rapidly dwindling water reserves. At the same time, partisan uprisings toppled the military governments only to fall to further conflict once they no longer had a common goal. 

By the 2010s, many had died and all that remained were a few isolated enclaves and outposts. Unlike their counterparts in North Yemen, these strongholds rarely traded with each other and became isolated fortresses ruled by bandits, warlords and cults. The Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2023 further reduced the population, until by 2024 the remains of South Yemen were divided between two extremely territorial proto-states. 

The first one, ruling out of the ruins of Ibb, was controlled by a remnant of the Yemeni Armed Forces. He called himself simply “The General”, and frequently got into fights with the other proto-state over water sources. To his south was the land of the Dust-Walkers, led by a cult leader who preaches a mix of Sunni Islam and Buddhism, with a healthy dose of cannibalism and self-sacrifice to boot. It is their fear for the fanatics to the south that keeps the General’s people in line. 

As of 2027, the Dust-Walkers are launching attack after attack at the fortifications surrounding Al Qa'idah and are wearing down the General’s forces. Everyday, more soldiers die and resources are stretched thinner and thinner. The General’s days are numbered. 

[1] To date, this is the only recorded reference to a “Caritian Republic”, which is very similar to a 20th Century Arabian Zakat Republic, though with a distinctly Catholic flair. Some scholars claim that the Holy See during the Great Death (2027-2035) resembled a Caritian Republic. 

Section 3: The Arab Century
https://youtu.be/HuJDNXmogdM?si=Nq8CK7FjxtGoAHyb 
Jordan

Official name: Zakat Kingdom of Jordan
Capital: Amman
Government Type: Constitutional Monarchy
Population as of final census conducted: 23,595,916 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: Uninhabitable
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $636.4 Billion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: League for Arab Cooperation
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Jordan remained displeased with the amount of territory Israel had taken during the various Arab-Israeli wars, and as such remained the Palestinian Liberation Organization’s main backer. Jordan was particularly angry about the loss of the West Bank to Israel. Jordan, Iraq, Egypt and Syria had planned on launching a surprise counter-attack on Israel around the end of October 1973, but Secretary Agassi advised against it, citing the sheer overwhelming support the USA was providing the young nation. 

The countries reluctantly agreed and stood down, calling off the attack. They decided that they would need overwhelming, absolute force if they were to have any hope of liberating their brothers. They would need an army, the biggest army in the history of the Arab world, and the greatest technology available. This army, referred to as the United Arab Army, would need to vastly outnumber the Israelis and the Iranians. Its soldiers must be the best men available, with the greatest weapons available, and every single one of them must go to war knowing that they may have to lay down their lives in the hope of a United Arabia. The fastest jet fighters and the sturdiest tanks would be needed if they were to stand a chance. 

President Karim al-Haddad, the man who replaced Nasser after he stepped down to deal with his health, worked with his peers in the Arab world to coordinate this long but subtle campaign of rearmament. The League for Arab Cooperation did a remarkable job of remaining inconspicuous - none of the intelligence communities of the world realized that the Arabs were preparing to attack Israel and not each other. For 15 years, the world viewed the Middle East as a place well on its way to becoming as peaceful and prosperous as Europe or North America. 

On the surface, the League for Arab Cooperation appeared as a simple trading bloc and multinational confederation to help advance Arab politics, and that was one aspect of it - however, the true purpose was to facilitate the enormous funds needed for recruiting, training, and supplying the military force that would become the United Arab Army. Shipments of artwork, building materials and humanitarian aid always contained something that furthered the goal of this massive army. A shipment of Saudi cloth would contain one or two ballistic vests, while raw phosphate from Jordan contained a separate jar of gunpowder. As long as the powers of the world got their cheap, cheap oil, no one bothered to look too closely. 

Jordan had an important role in this operation. Jordan was located in roughly the center of the Middle East, and as such became an important logistics center for the secret alliance. Materials and supplies were routed through Jordanian companies and sent to other nations. Jordan also didn’t have as much oil as other nations in the Middle East, and as such the people of Jordan emigrated abroad in the 1970s in search of better opportunities. Many in Jordan ended up as migrant workers in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Bahrain and Iraq, and Jordan began to be referred to as the “displaced kingdom”. To the women and children that stayed behind, their husbands sent them some of their hard-earned money, and this flow of cash was used by the government to further improve the infrastructure of the nation - officially to make it more attractive to workers, though a secondary purpose was to facilitate the secret rearmament of the Arab nations. 

Jordan also remained rather authoritarian throughout the 1970s, as King Hussein I retained a tight hold on the government. A series of peaceful protests were carried out in 1983, inspired by the liberalization occurring in other Arab countries around the same time. Some in the intelligence community believed that the rampant militarization would be followed by a civil war, giving a tiny peek behind the curtain at the looming Arab war machine, but King Hussein I relented, finally signing a constitution on May 10, 1983. 

This constitution not only turned the nation into a constitutional monarchy similar to Morocco or other Arab states, but also renamed the nation to the Zakat Kingdom of Jordan. Many of the oppressive decrees made in the 1960s and 1970s were lifted, and elections were held - in 1984, Tariq Nabil al-Khatib became the Prime Minister of Jordan. Prime Minister al-Khatib was a good friend of King Hussein I and worked with him to help implement his policies. The Zakat state of Jordan wasn’t as extensive as their other Arab neighbors, but Saudi Arabia donated about $50 million USD every year to help pay for the healthcare and education programs. 

King Hussein I became extremely popular with his people, and was frequently seen in public with Prime Minister al-Khatib. King Hussein I was also quite interested in various sports, particularly motorcycle racing, where he participated in the first Arab Motorcycle Race, held in Amman in 1985. These liberal reforms helped attract many back into the country, and the population rapidly increased. Mining remained the most profitable sector in Jordan, and with Prime Minister al-Khatib’s reforms, workers were finally allowed to unionize and working conditions dramatically improved. Phosphate from Jordan provided the base for fertilizers around the Arab world. 

When 1988 rolled around and the plan was nearing fruition, Jordan stood with Egypt and Iraq. Jordan became a staging ground for Operation: Ăzarʾēl, the Arab military invasion into Israel to recapture the West Bank. Initial battles were successful and showed promise, but the Jordan army got bogged down outside of Hamra due to supply chain issues. Reinforcements from Iraq and Syria were waylaid by the Israeli airforce, and for most of May 1988 Jordan struggled to make any ground. 

On June 7, 1988 the United Arab Army completed Operation: Mīkāʾīl and reached Israel through Palestine. They met up with the Iraqi, Syrian and Jordan forces to begin Operation: Jibrīl, which was the siege of Jerusalem. Things seemed to be looking up, with the Israelis on the retreat and the dream of a United Arabia seeming closer than ever. 

The next day, in an attempt to get the Israelis to surrender and end any more bloodshed, the Egyptian Coalition authorized Iraq to detonate a nuclear bomb 2 km off the coast of Tel Aviv as a show of force. 

But an Iraqi soldier misheard his orders and dropped the nuke directly on Tel Aviv instead. 

The Qatifist militants (which made up a large majority of the United Arab Army) believed this to be the start of Judgement Day, and that soon the world would be remade to be one without sin and temptation. This caused the Qatifists to throw themselves at Jerusalem's defenses, and when Israel’s threats of nuclear war were ignored, as the defenses were breached the Prime Minister of Israel authorized the Samson Option. 

Many capitols in the neighboring countries were destroyed. Amman was one such city. Because they were so close to Israel, they had no warning time. King Hussein I was killed in Raghadan Palace. Prime Minister al-Khatib was killed when Irbid was destroyed. Many other cities were outright destroyed, and the government of Jordan collapsed. 

Jordan became hell on earth: a land of burning fires, scorching sands and enough dust to block out the sun for decades. The survivors quickly took to fleeing the nation, going in some vague direction east. Many ended up in Kuwait or Saudi Arabia, and some of them even made it to Afghanistan and Pakistan. The members of the Jordan army who were still in Israel tried to take down as many Israelis as they could, believing they had no home to return to now. Those that survived joined the PLO in their Long March south to the ruins of Egypt, and others joined the Qatifists and became Islamic Warlords. 

The corpse of Jordan was picked over by scavengers and warlords so many times, that by the early 2000s it had been picked completely clean of anything useful. As the environment worsened, Jordan eventually became an impassable barrier, plagued by sandstorms and soaked by radiation. The Dead Sea evaporated in the 2020s, and radioactive salt particles blanketed the surrounding region. 

As of 2027, Jordan is a desolate, hellish wasteland incapable of supporting any life beyond the microscopic level. 

Saudi Arabia

Official name: Zakat Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Capital: Riyadh
Government Type: Islamic Absolute Monarchy
Population as of final census conducted: 43,286,345 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 1,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $3.348 Trillion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: League for Arab Cooperation
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

According to many scholars, Saudi Arabia was the birthplace of the Zakat system. Saudi foreign policy dictated that a portion of the government’s budget be given to less developed Arab nations as an act of charity, brotherhood, and solidarity. Negotiations during the early 70s led to an absolutely ludicrous and rapid increase to their GDP, though not as fast as other Arab nations. The industrial goliath of China imported barrels by the billions, consuming close to 30 million barrels per day during the Glorious Decades. 

Saudi Arabia never liberalized during the Glorious Decades, either - they were so obscenely rich that they were able to create a rather robust welfare state and still have left over money to dump into security, law enforcement, defense, and foreign aid. It was Saudi money that erected the vast, intricate network of oil pipelines that connected Asia, Europe and Africa. It was Saudi money that funded public schools for every single child in the Middle East, and Saudi money that paid for lavish banquets where the elite of the world would gather and raise a glass of champagne at another year of easy living. 

Saudi Arabia was the harshest and most repressive government in the Middle East, though Gaddafi’s Libya came close. Saudi Arabia was built on islamic law, and while that made them extremely generous and pious, it also made them quite conservative and resistant to change. Protesters in various towns actually claimed the government wasn’t being conservative enough, especially in relation to women’s rights, capitalism and defense. These ideas would significantly alienate the world from Saudi Arabia though, and so the King at the time (Khalid I) delicately balanced the demands of these conservative hardliners while also keeping Saudi Arabia open and attractive to investors. 

It was also Saudi money that funded the secret coalition of Arab nations intent on battling Israel. Tensions with Iraq and Saudi Arabia had been growing steadily throughout the 80s, and increased military spending between the two of them caused many to suspect a possible war between them. Iraq seemed to be getting on everyone’s toes those days: Iran, Syria and Saudi Arabia all seemed poised to squash the Iraqi fly. Many suspected it was going to be another proxy war between the USA and USSR, like Vietnam, Korea, and Bahrain. 

But the idea of the Zakat system was not the only thing that was born in Saudi Arabia. Qatifism, a fringe reactionary movement born out of Twelver Shia, emerged from the eastern cities of Saudi Arabia. It was described by many to be a twisted form of anarcho-primitivism mixed with conservative Shia islam. Works of art, along with oil wells, pipelines, and other industrial machines were destroyed. This caused economic instability to say the least, so King Khalid I banished the founder of this movement. He drifted around the Middle East, gaining many followers in Iraq, Iran, and Syria, before settling in Egypt. 

In 1987 the new President of Egypt, Mahmud al-Saeed, met with the drifter and convinced him and his people to join the Egyptian army. Qatifism had gained around 15 million followers by then, and almost all of them joined the United Arab Army. Others went to neighboring nations and convinced more citizens to join the cause, particularly in Iraq and Syria. 

The Egyptian Coalition had found its army to overwhelm Israel. 

President al-Saeed managed to convince the founder that not only was he the return of Jesus Christ (Isa as rendered in Arabic), but managed to convince the founder that he himself was the Mahdi, and his destiny was to conquer the enemies of Islam, starting with Israel. 

King Khalid I wanted absolutely nothing to do with this nascent movement, increasing the security budget of Saudi Arabia to keep an eye on these increasingly violent followers of Qatifism. 

In May 1988, when the Sinai War rolled around, Saudi Arabia remained militarily neutral in the conflict, though they provided humanitarian and logistical aid to the members of the Egyptian Coalition. Many of the bullets fired in Arab guns came from Saudi money. Israel did not target Saudi shipments as they did not want to upset the flow of humanitarian aid, but instead placed extremely harsh sanctions on them. Saudi Arabia even provided a legion of first aid responders to comb the battlefields of Iran so that the blood spilt would be minimal. 

Despite the King’s efforts to suppress Qatifism, this only caused it to grow, and in early June protests broke out demanding the nation join the battle. Fearing a revolution or civil war, King Khalid I relented and formally declared war upon Israel (but not Iran) on June 2, 1988. 

Less than 100 Saudi soldiers reached the frontlines at Jerusalem before the nukes dropped. For their trouble, Riyadh was blown to pieces in a mushroom cloud. Many mourned for the death of King Khalid I. Luckily, the Crown Prince was visiting a military depot in Kharj and was spared from the destruction. 

As the armies of the Egyptian Coalition retreated from the ruins of Israel to deal with the uprisings in their respective countries, some of them joined together to help defend the less-prepared nations such as the United Zakat Emirates or Bahrain. The Royal Saudi Navy, which was positioned in the Gulf of Persia to serve as a blockade against Iran, attempted to protect Bahrain from rogue vessels commandeered by the Qatifists. The Royal Saudi Air Force engaged in a bombing campaign to deny the Qatifist militias access to Iraq’s air force. The fog of war made it extremely difficult however, as every nation was essentially fighting a civil war. Friendly fire led to an estimated 10,000 deaths in Saudi Arabia alone. Near the end of June, the remaining ministers gave up and attempted to evacuate to North Africa. Working with Lebanese soldiers, they evacuated many of the high-ranking members of the Saudi nobility, including Crown Prince Fahd, and relocated them to Alexandria. However, the Crown Prince’s escort was shot down by rogue members of the Syrian Air Force, who then also bombed the city, killing President al-Saeed as well. 

Qatifism soon became a fire that none could control, and it burned through the Middle East, toppling governments and destroying industries. Saudi Arabia was no different. The bombing of Riyadh was viewed as the signal to begin the Qatifist uprising, and many in the Council of Ministers were assassinated by Qatifists. By July 1, 1988, the government of Saudi Arabia had ceased to exist, being replaced by a loose coalition of military generals and low-ranking officials. 

This led to an all out civil war between the remaining members of the nobility and their commanders, resulting in Mecca becoming only minimally defended and taken over by Qatifists. Some of the more secular members of the Saudi Armed Forces believed that defending Mecca was a lost cause and more resources should be spent on trying to secure oil fields, which were burning at an alarming rate due to Qatifist sabotage and Israeli nukes. Many of these soldiers vanished into the desert, never seen again, either killed by Qatifists or simply deserted. 

With great effort, a group of Lebanese Guards and Saudi Special Emergency Forces retook Mecca in mid-July 1988, but it remained a pyrrhic victory. Hundreds of thousands were killed, including civilians and priests. Operations expelling Qatifist forces were successful in Jeddah, Medinah, and Ahba. 

When the dust had settled at the end of August, almost the entire Saudi Royal Family was dead. Only a few minor princes remained. The Saudi Armed Forces weren’t in a better state, as defections, desertions and warlordism had claimed many commanders. General Fahd ibn Talal al-Mutayri, the last remaining general in the Saudi Armed Forces, decided that defending the holy cities along the Red Sea was the best option the Saudis had, and so dedicated his remaining soldiers to securing the western coast and reinstituting law and order. 

This new State of Hejaz allied itself with the newly formed United Arab Republic of the Nile, and collaborated on securing the area against warlords, bandits, and Qatifists. For the rest of the 90s, Mecca was defended against the Qatifist horde. This caused a minor schism in Islam, as some believed that it was not right to deny the Qatifists access to the holy sites of Islam. Many survivors went out into the wastes to attempt to sway the minds of the Qatifists, but none returned. On June 13, 1993, the founder of Qatifism was reported dead from radiation poisoning. His name has been lost to time. 

While many were content to live in peace, trying to live a good life before radiation or the sun took them, there were some members of the former Saudi army that missed the glory of their nation. They came up with a plan to “pacify” the chaotic anarchy to the south, in the land that used to be known as North Yemen. These soldiers convinced the last member of the royal family, the Crown Prince Saud V, to join them in their venture. The Chief Imam of Mecca, Abdulrahman al-Harithi, had become more politically influential than the remnants of the Saudi government, and so the hardliners decided that they would need to make a new kingdom where they were in control. 

North Yemen was in anarchy, ruled by warlords, bandits and Qatifists. It remained relatively divided, and as such the Saudi remnants were able to quickly pacify the settlements in the lower Sarawat Mountains. This new “Saudi Kingdom” lasted less than a year, as a popular uprising broke out when it was revealed that the Saudi occupiers were unfairly distributing food between the natives and the Saudis. The Saudi Remnants were humiliated, and King Saud V was killed by the mob. 

When the survivors returned to Hejaz, they were not allowed back in, and eventually wandered the wastes until settling in the ruins of Egypt and joining the United Arab Republic of the Nile. They defended the Suez with much zeal, but few of them were allowed back into the Arabian Peninsula. 

Hejaz and the United Arab Republic were kept alive by the sheer number of pilgrims that visited the region, bringing with them materials to repair guns, or tiny rations, or jugs of dirty water. Some could not offer anything other than their life, and so stayed in Mecca or Medinah to give their life defending the cities. Qatifist incursions still happened, but became less and less organized. General banditry and warlords soon replaced them. 

But by the Red Summer, things were getting grim. Fewer and fewer pilgrims were making the journey to Mecca, and relations between the United Arab Republic of the Nile and Hejaz were souring. Famine, drought and radiation were severely limiting the resources of both nations. Water riots in Tanta led to hundreds dead, and rising sea levels were coating the fertile lands with salt and made them unable to sustain life. On top of that, the Nile had become completely unpredictable. Disagreements between the mostly secular United Arab Republic and the religious Hejaz state over trade led to the two proto-states severing ties with one another. The United Arab Republic would fracture into civil war over allocation of the Nile, but Hejaz remained united, starving and dying of thirst. 

Chief Imam Abdulrahman al-Harithi attempted to distribute the left over rations equitably, yet many still died. To deal with the sharp decrease in agriculture, after much debate, he also authorized cannibalism. Only Qatifists were eaten, then dead Christian and Jewish warlords, then fallen Muslim warlords, and finally, the dead within Hejaz. It was here that many chose to starve to death rather than succumb to the depravity. It is estimated that 2-4 million died of starvation between the Red Summer of 2003 and the Purple Summer of 2011. 

In the 2010s, Hejaz would find itself fighting off several incursions from the more desperate remnants of the United Arab Republic, mainly Syrians and Sudanese. They believed that Hejaz had some secret reservoir of water, and attempted many times to break into the strongholds in the upper Sarawat mountains. 

During the First Great Heatwave, when the very buildings around Mecca seemed to sag and melt in the heat, it seemed that very soon Hejaz would once again return to the pages of a history book. That was until a group of African traders arrived in the salt-soaked ruins of Jeddah, claiming that they represented an organization that dealt in water and food. All they demanded in return were riches and jewels. The ailing Chief Imam, Musa ibn Rashid al-Zahrani, accepted the offer. As a token of good faith, he gave the traders a golden sculpture made during the Glorious Decades. It was a gamble, as none in Hejaz knew if these men would be true to their word, but they had nothing left to lose - it was either this or death by dehydration. 

Despite the traders leaving at night (it had become lethal to go out during the day ever since 1997), the sculpture warped and melted in the heat until it resembled a lion about to pounce. To the Water Lords of Ethiopia, this was considered a great gift and as such, they dispatched over a million barrels of water to be sent across the sea. The Ethiopian soldiers that escorted it were mainly Shia or former Qatifists, but they were welcomed into the holy cities with open arms. Women, children, and the sick were prioritized first, followed by religious leaders starting with the youngest, then soldiers in a similar order, and finally everyone else. 

Hejaz and Ethiopia developed a healthy trading relationship, where the many decadent wonders of the Glorious Decades were exchanged for shipments of water and food. Islamic art, silk robes, and golden sculptures were offered up in exchange for the waters of life. Young muslims from the horn of Africa began to migrate to Hejaz to take their pilgrimage, while Hejazi volunteered to be workers in Ethiopia. Many did not become slaves, as Hejaz was too precious a source of rare metals. Weapons were prioritized, and used in the feudal wars until Tewodros Bekele Hailemariam won the Ethiopian water wars and declared himself the “Emperor of Lake Tana”. 

Hejaz was kept alive through the trading, slowly becoming more austere and humble with every year. Silk robes and gold trims were replaced with simple clothes made from wool. Heirlooms were exchanged for bread and water. Eventually, as they began to run out of things to trade, groups of scavengers would try to pick through ruins to bring the Ethiopians valuables. Islamic artwork and other artifacts were kept and traded only when necessary, such as during the Second Great Heatwave. 

In the mid 2020s, a new problem began to emerge: with the rapidly decaying infrastructure, worsening climate, and extreme chemical pollution, many of the buildings and holy sites were falling into disrepair. The Kaaba had not been properly cleaned since 1994. Its kiswah had not been changed since 2023, due to the scarcity of materials. Many islamic traditions had been gradually scaled back and were at risk of being forgotten forever. Most importantly, literacy rates had plummeted dramatically, to the point that very few people outside of imams could read anymore. 

In 2025, Hejaz embarked on an ambitious project to not only preserve as much Islamic scripture as possible, but to actively write the Quran on as many surfaces as possible. Irrigation and fortifications were restructured to be verses written in giant arabic text, or carved into the walls of buildings. Imams worked at great length to manually copy, by hand, text to new quarans. Working with the many muslims in the Water Lord Confederacy, materials were gathered to erect a protective cover above the Kaaba to prevent acid rain from damaging the building further. Rare silks and other cloth were donated by muslims throughout Free Africa and sent to Hejaz to be turned into new kiswahs. On June 16, 2026, the Kaaba was cleaned for the first time in over 20 years. 

The Solar Flare did not impact Hejaz as much as other countries. Electrical systems had all broken down, and the few electronics that did work had been given in tribute to Ethiopia. The only notable event that marked the Solar Flare was a sharp increase in Qatifist raids, who believed that the lights in the sky signaled the start of the world being remade. 

As of 2027, Hejaz toils night and day to restore the holy sites of Islam. 

Iraq

Official name: Zakat Republic of Iraq
Capital: Bagdad
Government Type: Left-Wing Authoritarian Dictatorship
Population as of final census conducted: 57,239,804 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: Uninhabitable
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $626.85 Billion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic, Kurdish
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: COMECON
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Saddam Hussein was extremely bitter at how the rest of the Arab World had folded to the west. Syria and Egypt were no longer united. The Saudis, Omanis, and Emiratis had all bent over backwards to Europe, America, China and the rest. Iran was becoming less Islamic by the day. Only a few remained proud, steadfast Arab states. 

In 1973, Iraq turned to an unlikely ally - the Soviet Union. The remaining “true” Arabic nations - Libya, Tunisia, and Egypt - were all allied with the USSR. As Egypt and Iraq became closer and closer, Saddam learned of the secret plan to liberate Palestine. He believed that this common goal would be the first step to reunite the Arab world in a single Ba’athist state. 

To the outside world, Iraq remained a wildcard of a state. None of the major powers, not even the Soviet Union, was sure what exactly Saddam was thinking. Iraq frequently performed military exercises along their border with Iran and it seemed that they constantly flip-flopped between favoring the West and the East. It was all a feint of course (mostly). Saddam played the role of a sabre-rattler rather well. Diplomatic crises with minor Arab states such as the UAE, Qatar and North Yemen kept much of the world on their toes, but Saddam always backed down before things got too bad. 

Iraq also supported communist movements abroad, such as in Bahrain, Kuwait, and Syria. Many members of the PLO left Lebanon and Jordan to move to Iraq, where they were given extra privileges for their belief in the cause. Iraq was where the United Arab Army was trained, with Iraq providing the largest amount of troops other than Egypt. Saddam also roped the Soviets in to help him develop nuclear weapons and power plants. Iraq was one of the few countries to not completely outlaw nuclear power. 

In the 1980s, after the failed Iranian revolution, many of the Shia socialists fled to Iraq, which had become a melting pot for radicalized Arabs. Using Saudi money to buy massive amounts of arms shipments, Egypt then covertly sent the equipment to Iraq through proxy companies in Jordan and Lebanon. Iraq also bought tons of old Soviet equipment throughout the 1980s. The other nations in the Arab world, while they knew that Iraq was involved in some way in the coming war for Palestine, worried that Saddam would double cross them and set himself up as the undisputed leader of the United Arab Republic. Libya’s Gaddafi, another close ally of Moscow, had similar ambitions. 

Secret meetings between Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan about Saddam’s true motives concluded with President al-Haddad admitting that Saddam would receive a high-ranking but ultimately ceremonial position in the theoretical Arab republic. As it stood, they needed Iraq’s large army and their equipment if they would have a chance to succeed in liberating Palestine. And so, things went on as they had for the past decade. In 1986, the Wanderer and his followers came to Iraq. The movement of Qatifism spread heavily in Iraq, inspiring many Iraqi to join the armed forces. Iraq’s military swelled to 7 million active members between 1986 and 1988. 

In 1988, many believed that Iraq was preparing to invade Iran. The Iraqi-Irani border became one of the most militarized zones on the planet, and constant military exercises had the Iranians on high alert. The rapidly liberalizing Soviet Union didn’t want Iraq to compromise their gains with the West and frequently told Saddam to tone it down. 

Much of the world was shocked when Iraq threw their lot in with the now rabidly-nationalistic Egypt, none more so than the Soviet Union. Diplomatic ties between Iraq and the USSR almost collapsed until Saddam explained exactly what he was doing to Moscow. They cautiously relented, but stipulated that Iraq could not use nuclear weapons. 

Iraq was equally split between the Iranian and Israeli front. Iraqi soldiers made the land routes out of Iran impassible, while a blockade prevented them from using the ocean. They never invaded Iran, but every time the Iranians tried to mobilize and push outwards the Iraqi pushed them back. The soldiers on this front were mainly career soldiers, ones who had spent several years in the Iraqi army constantly watching the border with Iran. This meant many of the soldiers heading into Israel were the fresh Qatifist-aligned troops. 

These Iraqi Qatifists marched with the Syrians and Jordanians to retake the West Bank. The reinforcements from Iraq helped the Jordanians break past Hamra and into Palestine. The Qatifists were noted for practically throwing their lives away, frequently doing suicidal actions and fighting without self-preservation. 

When the United Arab Army had surrounded Jerusalem, Saddam finally had his moment. As a show of force, he authorized an Iraqi soldier to detonate a low-yield nuclear bomb 2 km off the coast of Tel Aviv, far away to not cause any damage but close enough to send a message. 

The soldier who was flying the jet misheard the order, and dropped the bomb on Tel Aviv. This action would end up setting off the chain of events that would doom the world. 

The nuclear taboo had been broken, and nuclear-capable countries around the world readied their arsenals. The Soviet Ambassador to Iraq got into a shouting match with Saddam and fled the country. President al-Saeed remained speechless. Out of stubborn determination or ignorance, he still believed that the situation was salvageable and that a United Arab Republic was still possible. 

The Qatifists did not see it that way. The Founder claimed that the sound of the nuclear blast was the trumpet of Israfil, and it signaled the start of Judgement Day. They threw themselves at Jerusalem, ignoring the Israelis warnings of retaliatory strikes, and broke in as the first clumps of radioactive ash began to fall. 

It is unknown how Saddam responded to the event, as Baghdad was the first city nuked. Israel, Iran and Iraq began lobbing their payloads at each other, with the capitals of Syria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Iraq all being destroyed. Dozens of oil fields went up in flames. A massive oil fire practically sliced Iraq down the middle, eventually burning into Saudi Arabia. 

The Ba’athist Party and the rest of Saddam’s regime very quickly fell to infighting. Millions were dead, and millions more were displaced. Rebel Qatifists forces took over various military bases and used the munitions to destroy yet more cities. One group even took control of Iraq’s remaining arsenal and bombed the Dead Sea and Persian Gulf with two low-yield nukes before a brave Iraqi pilot sacrificed himself to prevent more targets from being destroyed. 

The Iraqi civil war raged on for some time, as millions fled the country and millions more were killed. Over the course of 1988, every single high ranking member of the Ba’athist Party was either killed by Iranian vigilantes, angry Kurds, Qatifists, or other members of the crumbling government. Operations to put out oil fires failed or were only temporarily successful. Iraq’s provisional capital was moved every month due to the gargantuan firestorms that engulfed the region, setting entire cities on fire. Several evacuation attempts were made in 1989, and numerous members of the local government and military engaged in multiple campaigns to reunite the country. 

By 1990, it was clear that there were no victors and that Iraq had become a desolate, anarchic wasteland. Only Qatifsts stayed to destroy the remnants of industry, everyone else fled to Turkey, Iran or Kuwait. When the 21st century came around, Iraq had become a burnt-out desert, completely abandoned by all and avoided by scavengers and warlords alike. 

As of 2027, the Great Fires of Iraq still burn. The desert is so hot that it is incapable of supporting not just human life, but any life at all above the microbial level. 

https://youtu.be/pXZ9pItZ8qA?si=yLb4JMnJp0V-ygD5
Egypt

Official name: Zakat Republic of Egypt (until 1987), Great Arab State of Egypt (1987-1988)
Capital: Cairo
Government Type: Authoritarian Republic
Population as of final census conducted: 210,561,234 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 8,700,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.53 Trillion USD
Primary Language: 20th Century Arabic
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: COMECON (until 1975), League for Arab Cooperation (1975-1988)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

When Gamal Abdel Nasser stepped down as President of Egypt in September of 1970, he was regarded as the most famous man in the Arab world. In his place was a man named Karim al-Haddad, who grew up in Suez and saw firsthand the violence of the Arab-Israeli Wars. As long as the USA kept sending aid to Israel, none of them stood a chance of creating a peaceful Arab world. So President al-Haddad turned to the only power that seemed sympathetic to their cause - the USSR.  

The Soviets managed to convince President al-Haddad that as it currently stood, it would be foolish to attack Israel right now. Practically the whole world - from the United States, to Europe, to China and many places in the Americas and Africa - would be united against them. To stand against Israel now would mean the complete annihilation of the Arab people. President al-Haddad reluctantly agreed. In 1975, he founded the League for Arab Cooperation as a way to help foster unity between the Arab states and also prepare for this future war with Israel. 

President al-Haddad juggled Moscow and Riyadh, oscillating between Arab socialism, nationalism and religion, keeping just neutral enough to continue receiving aid from both the less secular Arab nations and the Communist world. One of President al-Haddad’s biggest accomplishments was the creation of the Great Arab Roadway, a series of highways, elevated motorways, and tunnels that connected many major Arab cities, spanning from Casablanca all the way to Kuwait City. The Great Arab Roadway even had several bridges spanning major gulfs, like a motorway crossing the Red Sea to connect Khartoum, Sudan to Mecca, Saudi Arabia. 

Some of the numerous communist policies that Egypt dabbled in included massive land redistribution programs. He also emulated Agassi’s idea of a “Pan-Soviet” national identity and created a system where Egypt recognized only two identities: Arab and Non-Arab. By default, non-Arabs couldn’t own land, get married, own a house or vote, but they also didn’t need to pay taxes, so Egypt became quite wealthy from all the large businesses hiding out in Cairo. After taking an extensive and convoluted exam, a Non-Arab could be registered as “Honorary Arab” and be able to marry other Egyptians and vote but they could never own a house or land. Egypt became a beacon of Arab socialism and its population exploded, reaching 200,000,000 people in 1978. The Nile Delta became one enormous sprawling megapolis. 

President al-Haddad remained staunchly secular like his predecessor. This caused some friction among the other Arab nations and various religious groups. In the 1980s Egypt fought a protracted conflict with several Islamic guerilla groups. The most notable event from this period was when the Aswan Dam was occupied by a group of terrorists, leading to a 25-day standoff between Egyptian security forces and the terrorists. 

In 1985, President al-Haddad finally relented and significantly relaxed the restrictions of organized religion. Shia Islam in particular saw a huge resurgence, and Supreme Imam Maulana Javed Rahmani of Pakistan congratulated him for this. Ultimately, this only caused further conflict between the more secular members of his cabinet (who felt he had given in) and the more pragmatic ones, leading to protests and threats of violence. President al-Haddad weighed his options and decided to resign, and was later assassinated in 1986. It is unknown for sure who the assassin was: many rumors floated around, including the CIA, KGB, China, the Israelis, and some even suggested the PLO. 

In his place was elected Mahmud al-Saeed, a small, sly man who spoke in short, deliberate sentences. When he learned of the secret plan to liberate Palestine, he scoffed at it. Why stop there? Why stop at Palestine? Make the new Arab Nation the fifth superpower! While his public persona was that of a radical, peace-making Nasserist, in private his ambitions dwarfed that of Saddam and Gaddafi. 

President al-Saeed made peace with the radical Shias and managed to convince them to join the Egyptian Army - if Egypt’s enemies were destroyed then surely it would be grounds for making the nation less secular, as it meant that Allah had favored their cause. He attempted to pit Gaddafi and Saddam against each other, promising that whoever liberated the most territory would serve as the supreme commander of the United Arab Nation. He also created a vast series of bunkers beneath Cairo under the guise of Metro stations and storage warehouses. He even reportedly made several deals with Moscow to get more military aid, in exchange for officially becoming Communist in 1990 and rejoining COMECON. 

But by far the most important contribution he made to the war effort was when he met the Founder of Qatifism in Alexandria on June 6, 1987. Later that day he pledged himself and the rest of the Qatifist movement to Egypt’s cause. Many historians speculate that al-Saeed claimed that ultimately, both Egypt and Qatifism worked towards the same goal. He also played into the Founder’s delusions of martyrdom and persuaded him to believe that he was the Mahdi - prophesied 12 Imam in Shia belief. 

On New Year’s Day, 1988, al-Saeed believed that Egypt was finally ready to fight Israel and take her place as the fifth Superpower. Egypt’s military had swelled to 35 million soldiers, with almost 17 million additional soldiers from Iraq, Syria, Jordan, and Libya. On May 15, 1988, at a rally outside of Suez, President al-Saeed famously said the 21st century would be the Arab Century, and declared war on Israel. The rest of the Egyptian Coalition declared war as well or sanctioned Israel. 

Using the huge army of Qatifists, Egypt waged a costly war of attrition across the Sinai. Within days, vast stretches of the peninsula were under Egyptian control again. It was at the original Israeli border that Egypt started to face serious resistance. The trenches outside Gaza became cramped tombs that made WW1 look like paradise. Every day, Israeli bombers would carpet bomb Egyptian cities and every day, the air raid siren would beckon millions to hide in the Cairo Metropolitan Metro. 

It was June when Egypt broke through the trenches. Syria and Iraq had reached the West Bank and the Israelis did a massive tactical retreat, falling back to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. The Egyptians, led by the Qatifists, chased them every step of the way. However, the Israelis had prepared for this, and had turned every major Israeli city into a fortress of concrete, barbed wire, machinegun nests and cameras. The Soviets, still sharing intelligence with the Egyptians, reported that each Israeli city was mostly self-sufficient and could hold out for years. All the Egyptians would need to do is wait outside their walls. By 1989, the people would have revolted and this new Israeli government would be more than willing to negotiate. 

However, that was not fast enough for al-Saeed. He authorized Saddam to do his show of force above Tel Aviv. It was to show the Israelis that the Arab World meant business. If the other major powers objected to nukes being used in this way, he was content to throw Saddam under the bus. 

But things did not end up that way. 

In retaliation, Cairo was carpet bombed with the Israeli Air Force’s remaining munitions payload. Many of President al-Saeed’s cabinet was killed in the blast, along with 40 million people. 

But things got even worse. 

Reports were pouring in of Qatifist squads rebelling and destroying much of the infrastructure in Israeli Sinai and the Arabic towns in Israel. Then demonstrations in Egypt itself rocked what was left of the government as hundreds of towns were toppled by violent revolutionaries advocating a return to “the old ways”. Skyscrapers, statues and oil wells were destroyed. And this fire was spreading all across the Arab world - soon the remaining leaders were all struggling to regain control of their countries and armies. President al-Saeed remained relatively safe throughout most of June, operating out of a bunker deep beneath the Suez Canal, but he was killed along with the Saudi Crown Prince when rogue Syrian Qatifists shot down the Prince’s plane and leveled the city. President al-Saeed was drowned when his bunker flooded with the waters from the Red Sea.

Egypt practically tore itself apart throughout 1988, with hundreds of tiny statelets forming along the Nile. Loyalists desperately attempted to regain control and re-establish a united Egyptian republic. The Founder himself rode around the Nile Delta like an angel of death. Many in the PLO, enraged that their homeland was now a pile of radioactive slag, rallied the remaining sane members of the Egyptian Coalition and forced the Qatifists out of the Delta, where the Founder then moved on to attack Mecca once again. 

The survivors, wartorn, scarred and too tired to fight anymore, settled in the Nile Delta. This group, composed of Palestinians, Jordanians, Iraqis, Syrians and Egyptians, eventually formed a government they called the United Arab Republic of the Nile. Much of the Levant had become a barren land salted with radiation and now many Arab nations were without a home. 

Almost the entire surface of Egypt was destroyed, blasted millions of years into the past. Even the pyramids were nothing more than dust and sand. Very, very, very little technology remained, all hidden in the many bunkers and tunnels beneath Cairo. 

This new regime was plagued with corruption, frequent deaths and instability. The All Arabian Congress was frequently deadlocked and the remaining technology was hoarded by the few government officials that had escaped the nuclear destruction. Expeditions into the Levant and Arabia were conducted for scavenging but they were frequently beset by warlords, bandits and Qatifists. This was until they made contact with the remnants of Lebanon and Saudi Arabia in Hejaz, and the two new states allied together. The Nile provided sickly, withered crops and Hejaz provided technology to help maintain the two of them. 

Many chose to leave the fledgling Republic in search of a better life. Ethiopia, Morocco, Turkey and Europe were common choices. For those that stayed, every year became harder. The Nile fluctuated between a salty trickle and a roaring typhoon that decimated the humble shacks and hovels along its banks. Finally, in 2003, it shrunk to the point that even the ruins of Cairo barely got any water. The All Arabian Congress, already unable to agree on even the most simple of tasks, fell apart as each of the survivor groups fell back into national lines. The Egyptians demanded the lion’s share of the tiny Nile, while the Sudanese demanded that they should get an equal amount as the Egyptians. The Palestinians demanded that they should have it since they had been out of their homeland the longest and the Iraqi demanded it because they fought the hardest in the War. The ruins of Cairo became an intricate maze of complex border disputes between a half-dozen stateless nations. Alliances were made and broken every month, and men were driven mad with thirst. 

When the Red Summer finally ended and the water returned to a relatively normal level, the damage had already been done, and the Nile Republics were never united again. All six of the major survivor groups constantly stole from one another or became bandits and warlords themselves, leading raids into Arabia and the Levant or west into the ruins of Libya and Algeria. 

Then the Purple Summer of 2011 came, and for the first time the Nile completely dried up[1]. Many left after that. Some attempted to attack the “probably Qatifist” Mecca, thinking that they had some secret supply of water. Others went to the coast to raid the states along the Mediterranean. Many of them became no better than the Qatifists that had destroyed their cities. A small number of them even allied with Israeli raider groups, partaking in eating whoever they could find. 

Those that remained, a few stubborn Egyptians who grew up hearing stories of Nasser and the early Revolutions, stayed behind in the decaying metro system. Over time, secret passages were found, some of them empty but some of them containing shipments of rations, building materials and one of them even contained an underground spring. More and more people were forced to spend months underground as the radiation, sandstorms, drought and fires caused untold destruction. 

By 2020, they were permanently underground. The population slowly grew, eventually spreading out across the entire Greater Cairo Metro Underground. But the Second Great Heatwave fractured even this tiny population and the various underground city-states became fierce rivals in the control of the few underground springs. 

As of 2027, the survivors below Cairo are rapidly running out of living space, food and building materials. The only thing that keeps them going is the idea of outlasting the Israelis. 
Israel

Official name: State of Israel (until 1988), Israeli Provisional Government (1988-2015), Israeli Confederacy (2015-2027)
Capital: Jerusalem (until 1992), Petah Tikva (1992-2027)
Government Type: Parliamentary Republic (until 1988), Authoritarian Dictatorship (1988-2015), Military Confederacy (2015-2027)
Population as of final census conducted: 8,683,789 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 3,100,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $526.77 Billion USD
Primary Language: Hebrew
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Nonaligned
Great Death Survival Rating: Remnant

Israel was a state that was constantly on edge. It was believed to be necessary - the Israeli government had to be ever vigilant and protect the Israeli people. That was why, when the various Arab nations surrounding Israel stopped being so aggressive to them, the Israeli government remained suspicious. 

Outwardly, Israel was cautiously optimistic, but the inner workings of the government were pulling out their hair trying to find out why Egypt was content to just let Israel keep the Sinai Peninsula. Yitzhak Navon, the man who replaced Golda Mier as the Prime Minister following his narrow victory in the 1969 election, described himself as a pragmatic optimist. Internal and foreign policy switched to neutrality and non-interventionism, as long as Israel’s neighbors acted equally neutral. 

Prime Minister Navon engaged in several bi-lateral summits with various countries throughout 1970 and 1971. Some of these meetings ended up including the Soviet Union, Iran, Turkey, and South Africa. Israel also held regular conferences with the United States and various Western European nations. The leaders of many Middle Eastern nations declined to meet with Navon but that was certainly better than completely ignoring him. 

In late 1971, Mossad became increasingly worried about the rumors circulating out of China. The assassination of Leonid Brezhnev had already made the Prime Minister’s cabinet worried about the greater geopolitical situation around the world, and when it was confirmed via CIA satellite that Mao Zedong had been killed as well, this quietly set the government of Israel into panic mode. The rapidly escalating hostilities between the USSR and China, and with the rise of previously low-ranking party members to the leadership of both countries, made inter-communist relations extremely unpredictable. 

In 1972, Mossad was even more confused as Chairman Chen re-organized China from the ground up to be a hyperindustrialized mixed economy, one now firmly aligned with the USA. With every report Prime Minister Navon received, he became more perplexed and in mid-1972 ordered the Mossad to make the observation of the Eastern Situation Israel’s highest priority. 

And then in September 1972, Israel was invited to an “urgently important” diplomatic meeting being held in Switzerland. Inside that conference room were representatives from the United States, Egypt, Iran, China, and several other Arab nations such as Saudi Arabia, Syria and Lebanon. As Navon’s aide and translator told him, the United States and China had organized this meeting to mediate a more permanent and lasting peace in the Middle East. Chairman Chen’s translators all stressed that this was of the utmost importance and that the new world order rested upon peace in the Levant and Arabia. 

The negotiations progressed over several weeks and finally on October 8, 1972, the Tehran Accords were signed. This binding treaty ensured that for the next 50 years, the nations of the Middle East would have an undisputed monopoly on the sale of petroleum. Other nations were forbidden from selling their oil below a certain price limit, and in return, the Western World and China would provide generous foreign aid packages to ensure the safety of Arab workers and a steady flow of cheap energy from the Middle East. 

Some of the conditions that Israel stipulated was control of the Sinai Peninsula and the State of Israel being recognized diplomatically by their neighbors. While the Sinai was conceded, the Arab states did not recognize Israel. Ultimately, they compromised on not placing sanctions on Israel, but no guarantee could be made that they would not attack Israel again. So the United States stepped in and penned a clause that made it so that not only would the USA give generous military, intelligence and logistical aid to Israel, but if any nation attacked Israel the West and China would boycott the purchase of Arab oil. On top of that, a formal treaty of military and economical cooperation was signed between Israel and Iran, ensuring that Israel would have an ally that wasn’t an ocean away or on the other side of the continent. President al-Haddad of Egypt, after much deliberation with the Saudi diplomats, finally signed the accords and provided the last signature needed. 

And thus, it seemed, peace was brought to the Middle East. 

Israel remained isolated throughout most of the 1970s, and only signed the Shanghai Accords in 1978 when it was clear that Chairman Chen had secured his place as China’s ruler and wasn’t going to be deposed any time soon. Israel began to extensively settle the Sinai peninsula, building numerous intricate and luxurious cities, resorts and parks. Many of these lavish resorts ended up opening in the 1980s, to massive success. Israel also let many Palestinians leave peacefully, who usually emigrated to Iraq or Egypt. As relations between the East and West improved, many Jews were allowed to immigrate to Israel, which massively swelled their population. This huge influx of new ideas, perspectives and cultures caused a rift in Israeli society, culminating in a constitutional crisis in 1984. European Jews frequently got into fights with Soviet Jews and mass protests forced the IDF to begin construction of new detention camps. 

Prime Minister Navon was finally outed in the 1984 election, and a much more moderate Jewish man from Canada named Gideon Morani took his place. Prime Minister Morani heavily focused on stabilizing the country. Generous welfare plans (funded by Iranian oil profits) helped lift many Israelis out of poverty and several new government positions were created, such as the Minister for Integration, which focused on ensuring that the many new Jewish immigrants felt safe and that their voices were heard. While Navon’s administration was quite secular, Morani’s doubled down even further on secularism. Morani was known for famously saying “All Jews, from the steppes of Asia to the jungles of South America, are welcome here. All of them have a home in Israel.” 

But both the Navon Administration and the Morani Administration remained cautiously wary of the political situation in the East. In 1982, during Agassi’s corruption scandal, Mossad began to consider a war between China and the USSR as a serious possibility. Israel had already refused to outlaw nuclear power in the aftermath of the Three Mile Island incident, and had developed nuclear weapons as far back as 1973, but Israel’s government began to conduct extensive research into underground arcology, hydroponics, desalination, and the potential biological and ecological effects of a nuclear war. Israel also never completely let their guard down, extensively fortifying their cities and conducting monthly drills. By 1985, many considered Israel to be the most militarized nation on Earth. 

Israel did not believe that the Arab world had completely forgiven them and had moved on. Their suspicions were proven right as the Arab world began to become notably more aggressive in the mid 1980s. Qatifism and extremism surged in the opening months of 1988. And finally, when the Egyptian Coalition revealed itself and demanded the Sinai back, the Israelis were not surprised. 

Israel shifted to a total war economy, and martial law, rationing, and strict curfews came into effect the second the invasion started. Trenches, artillery, and machinegun nests ensured that the invading army would pay in gallons of blood for every inch of territory they took. Bombing runs crippled supply lines and prevented large amounts of armor and mechanized infantry from reaching Central Israel until June. 

Many towns became dead silent as only the IDF was allowed to roam the streets. A total media blackout ensured that only government-approved information was transmitted over radio and television. Israeli ambassadors tried to leverage more support from other nations but much of the world was distracted by many other things, such as the hostage crisis in Sri Lanka, the efforts to rebuild Tuvalu, the ongoing negotiations between Maoists and Jihadists in Malaysia, Cape Verde’s attempts at developing a cure for Malaria, protests in Gabon, the Qatari civil war, democratic backsliding in Ghana, Sudan’s new pro-Egyptian government, martial law in the Congo, the cholera outbreak in Zimbabwe, the famine in Zambia, and investigations into war crimes in Cambodia. 

Once Prime Minister Morani heard of the nuking of Tel Aviv, he sighed and tried to give the invading army one last chance to avoid apocalyptic bloodshed. The Qatifist Army refused to halt their siege of Jerusalem, and when the city was breached on June 8, 1988, a tired, sleepless Morani authorized the IDF to launch retaliatory nuclear strikes. 

Many in Israel did not heed the warning sirens, and thus did not seek underground shelter as the bombs arrived. The Haifa metropolitan area was obliterated in a mushroom cloud and over 2 million Israelis lost their lives in an instant. Prime Minister Morani, upon learning of the untold destruction being carried out across the Levant and Arabia, simply told his cabinet to do “whatever they wanted now”, and excused himself to his office. 

He was later found dead of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. 

This caused a civil war within Israel’s government as many deserted their posts to be with their families. Those that remained were split about what to do, as some felt that they had nothing left to lose and might as well take down as many Arabs as they could, while others wanted the bloodshed to end. A few said why stop at Sinai and take over the rest of the Levant. 

By July of 1988, the Israeli civil war had concluded, with General Barak Ze’ev Shamir declaring the Israeli Provisional Government on July 2, 1988. He pacified the more rabid members of the IDF, allowing a grace period for all Arabs to leave the nation by the end of 1988 - afterwards, all non-Israelis would be shot on sight. 

The Israeli Provisional Government, essentially a military dictatorship led by the IDF, focused on securing the cities devastated by nuclear weapons and carpet bombing. Unofficial censuses were conducted and it was concluded that over one third of Israel’s pre-war population had died in the bombings or had gone missing. Surveys were then conducted to determine the amount of arable land left and the results were grim. As it stood right now, Israel would barely be able to agriculturally sustain a population of 1 million, let alone its pre-war population of 9 million. 

Israel’s surface remained relatively quiet throughout the rest of 1988. Most of the invading Arabs had retreated to deal with the escalating civil wars in their homelands. As the new year came, this changed, as the violence and chaos began to spread to Israel. General Shamir activated the Ark Protocol, which was the mass-scale evacuation of civilians to a huge series of underground bunkers built throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Originally constructed as a contingency plan for if the USSR and China nuked each other, it would serve as the new home of the Israeli people. Many of these bunkers were located beneath the many tourist destinations established along the coast, including some parts of the Sinai. Other bunkers were located beneath major cities though some of them were damaged to the point of being unusable. This series of shelters, known as the “Kibbutz Network”, were connected by tunnels that spanned the length of much of Israel. Many of these Kibbutz complexes were relatively self-sufficient, with primitive hydroponics and extensive desalination systems powered by nuclear reactors. 

The Ark Protocol would take quite some time to fully activate, as bunkers would need to be assessed on their habitability, the water purification systems would need to be tested, and most importantly people would need to be collected and evacuated to the bunkers. Finally, once a bunker had reached its occupational capacity, its entrance would need to be destroyed on the surface and its external defenses activated by the IDF. 

Many had believed that Israel’s government was destroyed when the war reached its nuclear conclusion and had emigrated to Europe or further east, sneaking back into the USSR. A few Jews ended up in Kashmir of all places, where they would go on to found the Brotherhood of Peace along with Muslims, Hindus and Christians in the aftermath of the Indo-Pakistani Nuclear War of 2002. 

Those that remained had to go through a complex process to confirm their identity, their political standing (mainly just to make sure they wouldn’t be a threat to General Shamir’s regime) and most importantly, have their fertility and health assessed. Terminally ill survivors, or women deemed infertile due to the radiation exposure, were carted off to a remote section of the desert and euthanized with cyanide-laced rations. The IDF saw the most desertions during this period as they combed through the wreckage of the cities and were forced to execute survivors not following the fertility doctrine. 

Numerous incursions, mainly from Qatifists or Jordanian survivors, kept the rest of the IDF busy when they weren’t assessing civilian health or demolishing bunker entrances. Arad was the site of a massive battle between the remnants of the Israeli 12th Infantry Brigade and what remained of the Egyptian 4th Infantry Brigade. 

Another part of the Ark Protocol involved completely closing off immigration (this was quite easy to do, as nobody really tried to get into Israel around this time) and also to sever diplomatic ties with every single nation on Earth. Ambassadors and diplomats were covertly extracted and transported to the ruins of Ashdod, where they went through the same process other civilians had to go through. 

By 1991, the IDF had finished canvassing the ruins for survivors and were setting up the last few bunkers. Extensive border security operations were then conducted. Automated missile defense systems, minefields spanning entire cities, and extensive chemical weapon use turned the surface of Israel into an uncrossable no-man’s land for the rest of the 90s. The last major operation conducted by the IDF included scuttling all of their remaining operational military vehicles into the Sea of Galilee and then retreating into Ginosaur. 

On Sunday, September 27, 1992, the last IDF soldier entered a tunnel in Be'er Sheva and sealed it behind her. The first part of the Ark Protocol had been completed. 

Not much is known about the exact details on the political, social and economic situation of Israel during this time. Only scattered documents in diaries, along with oral tradition, give glimpses of what life was like in the bunkers. Records indicate that 236 bunkers existed in the Kibbutz system, though only 197 have been discovered. Each bunker held a capacity of 10,000 individuals for at least 50 years, kept functioning by a nuclear reactor. Every single individual had a dedicated job - it was believed that giving citizens time to freely think would lead to rebellion. Resources were stretched to the limit. Diets consisted of a mix of fungi, lab-grown potatoes, and dehydrated nutrient packets. Religion and culture became very important, with some bunkers going out of their way to preserve Jewish traditions. The rabbi became important advisors to Provisional Commanders and offered guidance during times of famine and hardship. 

Living space and resources were considered extremely precious and distributed with mathematical precision. That was why, when survivors were assigned living quarters and a job, all males were ordered to submit to mandatory sterilization procedures. Healthy sperm was stored in various unmarked tunnels beneath the IDF’s command bunker and a list of all fertile women was kept. If a woman was found pregnant after 1993, she was to be transported to a high security military hospital where the baby’s health was constantly monitored. If the baby survived and was born healthy, the mother had a choice: either she or the father must die, as the population had to be kept stable. Many women chose to give up the father (usually a rapist rather than a lover), but some women chose to sacrifice themselves. In most cases, the choice was never even presented, as the mother died during childbirth. 

Once a year, in bunkers with a population below replacement level, the Provisional Commander (usually a veteran of the IDF or a member of the Pre-War government) authorized a fertility lottery, where a few women were chosen to be artificially inseminated. In order to be in this pool, the woman had to maintain a good standing with the Provisional Government, be a devout follower of Judaism, be married, and most importantly consent to a sterilization procedure after the child was born. If the child was stillborn, this procedure was still carried out. 

Another important aspect to life in the bunkers was the longstanding order of permanent martial law. The law was not as complex as pre-war law, and the few rules left were very strict. IDF soldiers served as the judge, jury and executioner, and citizens were given a single chance to correct their mistake or line of thinking before being deemed a criminal. For more violent crimes, they were sentenced immediately. It was seen as a waste of resources to imprison rule breakers, or even execute them, so what the IDF usually did was dump the criminals in the tunnels between the bunkers and let them fend for themselves. Many died, either from starvation, dehydration or radiation, but a few managed to be tough enough to survive. Rape, thievery and hoarding were the most common reasons Israelis were exiled from their bunkers. 

This kept the population on a very tight leash, but as the years dragged on, it became harder and harder to enforce it. Disagreements between the local leadership and central command over what exactly constituted an “unforgivable crime” led to a gradual breakdown of structure, and by 2015, each of the bunkers were essentially independent city states, loosely allied only in the pursuit of survival and the preservation of the Jewish people. 

On the surface, Israel had once again become a brutal battleground. Some of the exiles had managed to escape the tunnels and reach the surface, and banded together into groups for common survival. These gangs, known as the Israeli Exiles, frequently fought with Arabian raiders or European Neo-Crusaders. When they weren’t fighting other groups or themselves, they were frequently seen trying to break back into the Kibbutz system. 

In 2004, the largest group of Israeli Exiles, known as the Followers of Cain, kicked out the last of the Qatifists from Jerusalem and reclaimed it for the Israeli people. This caused a large stir in the survivor community and warlords from as far as Pakistan traveled to the Levant to take back the holy city. While the Israelis were vastly outnumbered, in order for an exile to survive on the surface they had to be particularly brutal so they did not go down easily. 

By 2011, the last of the IDF’s automated defenses had been exhausted, with every SAM turret destroyed or out of missiles, and most of the mines already detonated. Groups of Israeli Exiles had deciphered where entrances to the Kibbutz system likely where and significantly ramped up their attempts at breaking back in. This caused the IDF to create their “Purity” Policy, which consisted of Central Command pre-emptively severing contact with the “compromised” bunkers to prevent any ideological or biological contamination. A few of these bunkers would be broken into, and became havens for gangs of Israeli Exiles, Arab terror groups, and one under Qiryat Shemona even became the headquarters for the neo-Crusader group known as the Order of Paul. 

As this policy became used more and more, it caused further friction between the local commanders and the IDF leadership, and was one of the major factors for the Second Israeli Civil War. In 2014, the bunker under Rahat refused to seal off their entrance to the tunnels, and instead tried to evacuate as many civilians as they could and told them to flee to Shoval. Central command, fearing that the surface raiders would exploit this, authorized an emergency battalion to stop the fleeing Israelis and seal the breach. 

Almost 6,000 people were massacred that day. 

The soldiers were told that they had been contaminated with a plague and that to prevent the sickness spreading to the rest of the system, all of the carriers had to be put down. The tunnel was then collapsed in a controlled demolition. 

When the other local commanders realized what the IDF had done, it kicked off the Second Israeli Civil War. The main bunker located under Petah Tikva was attacked by a coalition of 36 neighboring bunkers and led to the aging General Shamir having his hands and feet cut off and sent to hobble around on the surface until he bled out. 

With each year, the bunkers became more and more isolated. Some of them allied together and traded supplies, while others went silent. A few tried to reform the Provisional Government, but those were wiped out by a much larger coalition. This Israeli Confederation soon became distracted with a new problem - the Israeli Exiles were getting more and more successful in breaking into the bunker system. Refugees were evacuated when they could, but it led to overcrowding and disease. 

Electrical systems began breaking down in late 2017, and by the end of 2018 less than 100 bunkers remained. Radiation contaminated several bunkers when a reactor was damaged in a battle with invaders. The IDF almost always beat back the raiders but each battle was more costly than the last. Resource shortages, famine, and raids had caused some bunkers to nearly run out of food. A few of them decided to take drastic measures and completely cut off the flow of refugees. Others randomly executed those who were deemed too old, too sick, or had broken a mysterious arbitrary law. And then, a very small number of them decided on another option: the recycling of Arab invaders as an emergency ration for refugees. 

The raiders were only growing more desperate as the bleak situation on the surface worsened, and the IDF was gradually running out of bullets, despite creating underground gunsmithing factories. The bunkers switched to communicating using automated coded messages, and one by one they went dark. 

By 2025, only thirteen bunkers remained, regularly transmitting coded messages to each other. They were the most distant, isolated bunkers, separated by dozens of kilometers of tunnels from the nearest bunkers. These ones were never the site of a massive refugee crisis and had remained obscured enough to not be broken into by raiders, or had lasted long enough to re-seal the entrances. In 2026, the bunker beneath Taba in the Sinai was flooded after a landslide caused a wall to collapse, reducing the number to 12. 

The last message sent out by one of these bunkers consisted of the phrase “The 20th umbrella is leaving Algiers”, transmitted out of the bunker beneath Neviot. Many researchers believe that this message indicated a catastrophic system failure. The Solar Flare significantly damaged the Kibbutz system, causing many tunnels to flood, nuclear reactors to stop functioning correctly, and hydraulic doors to seal themselves. 

As of 2027, the status of Israel is unknown. While evidence does exist that the inhabitants of the modern-day state of Amursky trace their lineage to Israel, it is not known precisely when they left the Levant. The most common accepted theory places the date between 2035 and 2070. 

[1] The Nile returned in 2012, but became so unpredictable that it was unreliable to use for agriculture until the 2100s. 
Except from a weathered pamphlet found on a boat sunken in the Gulf of Tonkin

In the Eastern Provinces of Saudi Arabia there lived a devout follower of Shia. He resided in the town of Al-Qatif, on the shores of the Persian Gulf. He was an outcast imam who had been removed from his Mosque for preaching such a conservative lifestyle that even the King’s opposition was confused. To him, the Zakat system was not Arab socialism, but a great temptation, made by wicked men in high places who had long forgotten that hard work was its own reward. To him, women were to be protected, not bought like slaves at a market. He became disillusioned with how soulless and stagnant life had become, and left the streets of Al-Qatif to wander. 

Everywhere he went, he saw the same thing: men falling into temptation and hedonistic desires. Was this how mankind was meant to live? In such spiritual rot? With every city he visited, he only became more firm in his belief that the answer was no. Arab oil had tainted not just the Arabian world, but the whole world as well. And everywhere he went, he saw the same, tired people, with the same dull look in their eyes, as if they wanted to escape this madness. 

The Pact of Iran must be destroyed. The oil had to stop flowing! He chanted as he walked the streets of Al Jubail. He walked the streets naked, for he did not have the skill to make clothes by hand. He did not wash himself, for he did not have water to bathe in. He was handed a robe made of silk by a man who pitied him. This man became his first convert, and they both walked side by side, naked, as they preached of the temptation and corruption that had tainted all of mankind. 

In 1982, the soldiers of the corrupt false King of the Saudis did surround the man and his followers, and banished them from the holy land. As he wandered the Arab world, his flock grew, and many joined him. Fletchers, carpenters, machinists, weavers, bakers and butchers all joined him, for they too had become weary of the world. They clothed themselves in raiment uncorrupted by greed and materialism, and ate food prepared without excess and sin. And everywhere they went, they were cast out and told to leave. Men and women, secular and devout, Sunni and Shia, shunned the Wanderer and his people. 

That was until he came to the glorious land of Egypt, of Cairo-Upon-The-Nile. Egypt was like the other nations of the world, except they had tricked the Tempter and were merely pretending. They still lived the Old Ways and labored in secret to reunite the Ummah. The righteous President of the Arab Republic, Mahmud al-Saeed, saw in The Wanderer that he was a kindred spirit, as they both labored for the good of all mankind. 

The Righteous President saw the valiant jihad The Wanderer was leading, and swore to uphold his cause. With holy weapons blessed in the waters of the Nile, The Wanderer and his people joined the fight to unite Arabia and eventually all of mankind, freeing them from the tyrants of temptation. Many saw his cause was just and joined his movement, pledging their lives so that mankind might one day be free of hedonism and laziness. 

The righteousness of their struggle was only confirmed when Israfil sounded the trumpet and began the Day of Judgement. It was in Mecca that The Wanderer revealed himself to be the Mahdi, and the Righteous President revealed himself to be Īsā ibn Maryam, and the two of them set to work in ridding the world of temptation and evil. 

But Īsā ibn Maryam was murdered by non-believers, and in holy retribution the Mahdi passed judgement of many of the wicked kings and lords throughout the land. The ummah rallied around the Mahdi and they marched across the world, tearing down the monuments to vanity, temptation and hedonism. With each tower that fell, mankind became more pure and righteous. 

When the ummah was cleansed, when humanity was shown to live again without excess greed and temptation, without destroying the beautiful world, the Mahdi declared His work was done. He ascended to the heavens to await the death of His enemies, leaving behind his teachings to his many disciples. 

Soon, once all the excess and greed, the hedonism and debauchery are wiped away, He shall remake the world to be the place of purity and beauty it was always meant to be. 


Addendum
The Sinai War
From “The Four Great Sins: A History of the Atomic Wars” by Elder Mateo Álvarez Sombra-Kolob, fifth edition. Originally published in 943 ASJ, current edition published 971 ASJ

https://youtu.be/AhCWZiJgh2c?si=ykgVNpUrpO1JPVGC 

The Sinai War was the result of 15 years of preparation by a coalition of several nations. The ambitions of several national leaders clashed and resulted in the slow descent and death spiral that ended the old world. And yet, most of the factions involved believed they were truly doing the world a service. 

The Sinai War involved the Egyptian Coalition and the Israel-Iran Axis. Some nations provided support to the Coalition, but did not involve themselves in the war directly. Others simply expressed their public approval of the Coalition, or simply sanctioned Israel. 

Arabic nations that remained truly neutral included Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco, Mauritania, Lebanon, North Yemen and Somalia. Algeria even offered to mediate a peace between Egypt and Israel, though both parties ignored the offer. Other Arab and predominantly Muslim countries only sanctioned Israel, like the United Zakat Emirates, Bahrain, Kuwait, Pakistan and Malaysia. Oman and South Yemen expressed public support for Egypt but declined to place any sanctions on Israel. 

Of the four main powers, only the USSR paid any attention to events going on in the Levant. The USA and Europe were both trying to deal with a number of hostage situations abroad, and the Chinese didn’t expect the violence to escalate significantly. 


The leaders of the Egyptian Coalition. From left to right: Prime Minister Tariq Nabil al-Khatib of Jordan, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, Foreign Minister Saud bin Faisal Al Saud of Saudi Arabia, Brotherly Leader Muammar Gaddafi of Libya, President Mahmud Al-Saeed of Egypt, President Omar al-Bashir of Sudan, Foreign Minister Rahim Altaf Qureshi of Pakistan and President Hafez Al-Assad of Syria. Photo taken sometime in 1986. 

The Egyptian Coalition comprised the nations of Egypt, Sudan, Libya, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Iraq. Saudi Arabia and Pakistan provided mainly logistical and economical support, rather than military support. 

The Sinai War was essentially split into three fronts. The first was the Sinai Front, where the armies of Egypt and Sudan fought to take back the Sinai Peninsula from Israel and eventually move north-east towards Jerusalem. Libya provided logistical support for Egypt in this front, and also provided a part of their navy to help create a blockade in the Mediterranean. The other front was the West Bank Front, where the armies of Jordan, Syria and Iraq advanced from the north and into the West Bank of Israel. Saudi Arabia and Iraq also pooled their navies to create a blockade against Iran. The third front was the Iran-Iraq border, where Iraq tried to prevent Iran from providing as much support to Israel as they could. The Egyptian Coalition tried to minimize the bloodshed on this front. 


Mahmud Al-Saeed, President of Egypt from 1986-1988

The war opened on May 15, 1988, when Egyptian President Mahmud Al-Saeed made a famous speech at the Suez Canal. He announced that not only Palestine shall be liberated, but that the Arab World be united again and become a superpower to rival the USA, Europe, USSR and China. He claimed that the 21st century would be the Arab Century. Syria, which had previously been firmly in the sphere of the USA, unveiled its allegiance to Egypt and the rest of the Arab world. This caused diplomatic ties to be severed between the two nations, and Syria was kicked out of the Alliance of Industrial Nations. Similarly, the USSR severed diplomatic ties to Iraq for their aggression and violating the Tehran Accords. 

The Egyptian Coalition all declared war within 24 hours of Al-Saeed’s address. The other neutral Arab nations did not place sanctions on Israel with the same level of synchronicity, however. Kuwait, for example, debated back and forth between supporting Iran or throwing in their support with the rest of the Arab world. Ultimately they decided on placing sanctions on Israel, though it was near the end of the war in June. 

President Al-Saeed had previously made peace with the more radical elements of the officially secular society of Egypt, and had also managed to convince the leader of a new movement - known as Qatifism - to join his cause as footsoldiers. This swelled the Egyptian Army, increasing its membership by 15 million over the course of 1987. Part of Iraq and Syria’s army was also composed of Qatifists. 

Israel had long prepared for this potential war as well, and shifted to a full wartime economy. The entire country was placed under martial law, strict rationing and an extremely harsh curfew. Drills were conducted every day at random times. The Israeli Air Force engaged in bombing runs around the clock, slowing supply lines down as much as they could. 

Within 6 days, the combined Egyptian and Sudanese armies rolled over the Sinai, retaking it with much bloodshed. It was believed that over 1 million soldiers, mainly Qatifists, died within the first week. A small contingent of Libyan forces, numbering less than 100, were sent to serve as rear guards. Gaddafi claimed the majority of his forces remained on alert and were stationed at the border to form a redoubt for Egypt to retreat if things got messy. Evidence found in the ruins of Moscow instead shows that he had planned on taking over Egypt (along with Tunisia) if things hadn’t gotten quite so messy. 

Egyptian and Sudanese commanders frequently used the Qatifist recruits as cannon fodder, serving as a vanguard so that the more capable and battle-hardened mechanized infantry could focus on taking out Israeli positions. Israel had established few bases in the Sinai, all of which fell by the end of May. 

The Mediterranean Blockade saw far fewer casualties. The Libyan and Egyptian Navy, both composed of old Soviet equipment, was roughly evenly matched with Israel’s navy, composed of old American equipment. Syria’s navy was composed of old American equipment as well, which allowed the three navies to more efficiently exploit weaknesses in the Israeli navy. However, the Israelis used the same advantage to destabilize the Syrian Navy, and forced them to retreat near the end of May. Overall, less than 2,000 casualties were reported in naval battles between Israel and the Egyptian Coalition, the majority of which were sailors in the Syrian navy. Israel attempted to break through the blockade several times, but failed. Ultimately, Israel resorted to escorting super-sonic carrier planes across the sea as their main method of resupplying. Libyan ships also accidently sunk a Lebanese fishing vessel on June 7, 1988. 

Iraq, Syria and Jordan primarily fought on the West Bank front. Jordan was bogged down at first, unable to make much progress into Israel before the reinforcements and supplies from Syria and Iraq arrived. Syria diverted some of its military to help reinforce Iraq’s forces on the Iranian front, but a majority of their army marched south to help Jordan break through the Israeli defenses. Syria, using old American equipment, provided most of the mechanized infantry, armored divisions and artillery on the West Bank front. Iraq provided mainly air support and tanks. Lastly, Jordan provided combat engineers and ensured the supply line remained intact. Of the professional armies, Syria’s soldiers fought the hardest, as President Al-Assad promised luxurious rewards for the soldiers who killed the most Israelis. 

The Iranian front was rather small, consisting of a heavily militarized border between Iraq and Iran, and a Saudi-led blockade in the Persian Gulf. The Saudis and the Iranians played a very intense game of political chess with their forces, always keeping the other on edge but never going far enough for actual battles to take place. The Iraqi-Iranian theatre, meanwhile, saw a small but steady stream of casualties over the course of the war. About 1000 a day died from artillery strikes, bombings and mechanized assaults as the border shifted constantly. The Iraqi soldiers were very well trained though, having prepared and trained for this for almost a decade, and managed to ultimately keep the Iranians at bay and unable to make any major strikes against Iraq or the rest of the Coalition. 

The majority of the fighting happened in June of 1988, when the Egyptian Coalition broke through both the Sinai and West Bank fronts. This caused the Israeli army to perform a massive tactical retreat and regroup around Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. Egypt had already been informed via Soviet intelligence that Israel had concentrated most of their defenses in the Central Levant, and that this was where the fighting got the heaviest. Saudi Arabia finally sent troops around this time. On June 7, 1988, the two sides of the United Arab Army met and encircled Jerusalem. 

Soviet intelligence suggested that the Arab forces simply wait out the Israelis, but this was not fast enough for President Al-Saeed. He authorized Saddam to detonate a nuke 2km off the coast of Tel Aviv, as a show of force. This was the whole reason why President Al-Saeed had put up with Saddam’s erratic nature - he was the only Arab state with nuclear weapons, and had been promised a high-ranking ceremonial position in Egypt’s planned superstate. However, the pilot misheard the order and dropped the nuclear payload on Tel Aviv itself, ending any chance of a peaceful resolution. The Qatifists in the United Arab Army viewed this as the start of the Judgement Day, and began attacking Jerasulem with all of their might. Israel threatened to retaliate with nuclear strikes if the army broke into Jerusalem, but this did not stop the invaders. 

On June 8, 1988, Jerusalem’s defenses were breached and the nukes started flying. 


Photo taken by an American diplomat outside of Haya, UZE. 

After the fall of Jerusalem, several cities and oil fields were targeted by Israel. The capitals of Libya and Sudan were both targeted by Israel, but the nukes were shot down before hitting their targets. The nuke destined for Tripoli landed somewhere in the Mediterranean Sea, while the nuke destined for Khartoum sank into the Red Sea. Gaddafi and al-Bashir then both activated the rest of their armed forces to defend their borders against the inevitable flood of refugees. Gaddafi also ordered his navy to attack the ships in Egypt’s navy, though only with the intention of scuttling them. The Libyan navy told the Egyptian sailors that the ships had been compromised by Iranian spies, to which the sailors believed. 

As for the Qatifists, after the capture of Jerusalem the Founder of Qatifism declared himself the Mahdi and set off to take over Mecca. In the chaos, he and his army were able to easily take over the city. With this, Israel decided they had nothing left to lose and launched their nukes to destroy Iraq. 

Bagdad was targeted first, obliterating much of the high command in the Iraqi military, including Saddam Hussein. This was followed by Mosul, Basrah, Erbil, Kirkuk and many, many nearby oil fields, such as the West Qurna, Artawi, Az Zubair, East Baghdad, Hamrin, Majnoon and Nahr Umr fields. 

Saddam, in his last moments, decided to take Israel down with him. The Haifa metropolitan complex was destroyed. Many in Israel, sick of the air raid drills, did not heed the warning and millions died. For Iran, Tehran was targeted, but the missile didn’t reach its destination. Isfahan and Ahvaz were direct hits, and the numerous oil fields nearby were set aflame. The Abteymour, Ahvas, Bibi Hakimeh, Gachsaran, Karanj, Kupal, Mansouri, Marun, Masjed Soleyman, Rag Sefid, and Shadegan fields were all turned into burning geysers and hellish pillars of smoke. 

Nukes destroyed several notable cities, such as Damascus and Aleppo in Syria, killing President As-Assad. Al-Omar oil field in Syria was set alight. Cairo was targeted, but the bomb was shot down, instead landing in Suez. Because of this, the Israeli Air Force used their remaining supply of conventional bombs to turn the Cairo metropolitan area into dusty wasteland. In Jordan, the destruction of Amman and Irbid resulted in both the Prime Minister and King dying. This was followed by Riyadh and the death of King Khalid I. Finally, major Saudi oil fields were targeted, such as the Abqaiq, Ghawar and Shaybah fields were destroyed by Iranian nukes. 

In total, over 25 million people died within the span of three hours, and almost 900 billion barrels of oil started to burn. 

Other nations were destroyed not by nuclear fire, but by Qatifist rebel movements. Kuwait’s government was wiped out within two months of the nukes dropping. Qatar’s government had already fallen a few days before the nukes dropped, and also to Qatifist insurgents. 

Qatifist-induced violence reached as far as Algeria, where several mosques were bombed. Tunisia, due to being a much smaller country, had an easier time wiping out their Qatifist violence. Lebanon was also plagued by pro-Qatifist violence but it was quickly stamped out. Qatifist violence was strongest in Iraq. Many Qatifists gained access to Iraqi munitions and equipment, and a few of them even managed to gain control of Iraq’s remaining nuclear weapons. A suicide mission led by a squad of brave Iraqi soldiers stopped them, but not before the Qatifists detonated low-yield, high radiation bombs on the Dead Sea and the Gulf of Persia. In other places, like Egypt, Syria, and Jordan, Qatifist revolutionaries destroyed what little bits of government had survived. President Al-Saeed was ultimately killed at the end of June, 1988, when his bunker under Suez was destroyed and he drowned in the Red Sea. 

And then there were nations like Oman, which were spared both the wrath of the Israelis and the Qatifists. Oman collapsed not from war or revolution, but the massive influx of refugees and the effects pollution had on the environment and populace. North Yemen’s collapse was much more violent, as a weak leader was unable to prevent the country from falling into civil war yet again. Lebanon lasted the longest, but refugees and environmental degradation made life there very hard. Israel’s Prime Minister, showing immense guilt for the lives taken, committed suicide, plunging Israel into a brutal civil war. Finally, in Sudan, the disastrous results of the war ended in the government collapsing. 

The UZE was hit particularly hard by the Qatifists, due to the country’s reputation for excessive wealth. Pipelines were sabotaged and Dubai was the site of a massive terrorist attack. The Royal Saudi Navy and Armed Forces attempted to evacuate citizens and slow down the Qatifists, but their efforts did little to help the situation. The massacre in Haya and the death of many diplomatic officials also caused a reduction in diplomacy worldwide. Bahrain was a similar story, though it was not targeted because of its perceived wealth, but simply because of how small it was. Being the smallest Arab state in that era, it was very easy for the Qatifists to overwhelm it. Again, the Royal Saudi Navy attempted to help evacuate as many people as possible and also to shoot down any unauthorized fighter jets (usually Syrian or Iraqi ones, piloted by Qatifist militants). Almost half of the Royal Saudi Navy was destroyed by rogue Iraqi fighter jets who carpet bombed the fleet, the sea and the island. Bahrain’s fear of the Qatifists would ultimately lead to a civil war that made them an easy target. Lebanon’s army was the other main force to combat the Qatifists. They worked with the Royal Saudi Armed Forces to help escort the Saudi Crown Prince and also participated in the mission to retake Mecca from Qatifist forces. While the mission to evacuate the Crown Prince ended  up proving a failure, the campaign to retake Mecca was not, though many, many died. 

In total, almost 75 million died in time between May 1988 and July 1988. Some historians consider the liberation of Mecca from Qatifist forces to be the end of the war, while others classify the nuclear cascade to be the true end. 

Regardless, the effects are still felt today. 
Document: The Tehran Accords
The Tehran Accords: A Plan of Peace and Stability for the Middle East
Preamble

Recognizing the need for peace, stability, and cooperation in the Middle East, the United States of America (represented by President Richard M. Nixon) and the People’s Republic of China (represented by Chairman Chen Qiang) have negotiated with the many diverse nations within the Middle East region to create a plan for lasting prosperity not just for the nations involved but the entire world. The signatories of this document commit to the goal of eliminating conflict with the State of Israel, providing safe, affordable access to Arabian energy and creating a stable energy market for the industries of the world to thrive. The parties have agreed to the following: 

Article I: Cessation of Hostile Acts towards the State of Israel 
The participants of the Six-Day War of 1967, along with any nations that have previously expressed hostility towards the State of Israel, are to cease attacks against the State of Israel. After the signing of this document, direct or indirect attacks against the State of Israel shall be met with the immediate termination of this agreement. 
This provision does not require any signatory states to recognize the State of Israel or open diplomatic relations with them. Only the cessation of hostile acts is required. 

Article II: Sanctions and Economic Warfare
All signatories agree that no nation shall place sanctions, trade embargos and other forms of economic warfare against the State of Israel. The violation of this clause shall be met with the immediate termination of this agreement. 
Policies already in place at the signing of this document must be ended by 31 December, 1973. 

Article III: Energy Market Stabilization 
All non-Arab signatories (with the exception of the Imperial State of Iran) are to refrain from setting their energy export prices below the agreed market level, inflation withstanding. 
The agreed market level shall be determined by a joint council of economists from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Imperial State of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic, the Iraqi Republic, the United Arab Emirates, and the Arab Republic of Egypt. 
The market price will be re-evaluated every year on 10 June. 
The United States, Canada, Western European Union, People’s Republic of China and Japan all commit to immediate and sustained financial contribution to ensure the continued creation, maintenance and regulation of Arabian energy infrastructure and industries. In addition, the signatories of this document all pledge to prioritize the purchase of energy from the countries making up the Joint Energy Council. 

Article IV: On Israel’s Continued Security 
The United States again commits to the security of the State of Israel and will provide additional funding, military aid, and technical support to dissuade any Arab state from attacking Israel and violating this agreement. 
The Imperial State of Iran and the State of Israel, recognizing the critical need for regional stability, agree to establish an organization for the mutual defense of both states should conflict arise. 
The members of the Palestinian Liberation Organization shall relocate from states neighboring Israel. 

Article V: Duration
This treaty shall remain in effect for 50 years, after which it may be re-evaluated. 
Any countries breaking this agreement shall be subject to a total embargo of all goods from the remaining participant countries. 

Article VI: Other Clauses For Regional Stability 
The Imperial State of Iran shall recognize the sovereignty of the People’s Syndicalist Confederation of Bahrain. In exchange the Imperial State of Iran shall receive 50% of the profits from the Tehran-Bahrain Oil Company. 
The Arab Republic of Egypt, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Heshamite Kingdom of Jordan shall recognize the territories gained by Israel in the Six-Day War of 1967 as sovereign territory of Israel. This treaty defines these areas as the Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, Golan Heights and the West Bank. 

Signatories
President Richard M. Nixon, representing the United States of America
Chairman Chen Qiang, representing the People’s Republic of China
Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, representing the Imperial State of Iran
King Khalid I bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, representing the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
President Hafez al-Assad, representing the Syrian Arab Republic
King Hussein I bin Talal al-Hashimi, representing the Heshimite Kingdom of Jordan
Sultan Qaboos bin Said, representing the Sultanate of Oman
Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, representing the United Arab Emirates
Chairman Hassan al-Mutairi, representing the People’s Syndicalist Confederation of Bahrain
President Élias Sarkis, representing the Republic of Lebanon
Emir Sabah Al-Salim Al-Sabah, representing the State of Kuwait
Emir Ahmad bin Ali Al Thani, representing the Kingdom of Qatar
President Abdul Rahman al-Eryani, representing the Yemen Arab Republic
President Saddam Hussein, representing the Iraqi Republic
President Salim Rubaya Ali, representing the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen
President Karim al-Haddad, representing the Arab Republic of Egypt
Prime Minister Yitzhak Navon, representing the State of Israel
Interlude
The Final Emergency
Bangladesh

Official name: People’s Republic of Bangladesh (until 1989), Islamic Republic of Bangladesh (1989-1999), Indian Occupation of Bangladesh (1999-2002) 
Capital: Dhaka (until 1999), Bogra (1999-2002) 
Government Type: Parliamentary Republic (until 1989), One-Party Islamic State (1989-1999), Military Occupation (1999-2002)
Population as of final census conducted: 282,577,001 (circa 2000)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: Uninhabitable
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $349.14 Billion USD
Primary Language: Bengali 
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: COMECON (until 1982), World Prosperity Alliance (1982-1989) 
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Bangladesh split off from Pakistan on December 16, 1971, succeeding in their War of Independence. With a new pawn on the chessboard, the various regional powers attempted to curry favor with this nascent nation. China initially supported the efforts of Bangladesh before Chairman Mao was assassinated, and foreign aid was suspended as Chen reorganized the Chinese government. The USSR, sensing an opening, made overtures to Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and firmly secured an influence over the fledgling government. China seemed to be out of the picture, so Bangladesh became an experiment for the USSR to demonstrate to India how socialism was the way of the future. 

After President Rahman was almost assassinated on August 15, 1975, he placed the country under martial law and further tightened a hold on his power. He suspended elections and became a dictator in all but name. Using his attempted assassination as proof of “pro-Chinese sentiments”, he was able to obtain additional security services from the USSR. In fact, he completely defunded the military and police except for those loyal to him, and relied on Moscow for everything else. 

Throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Morgan Administration and Chen’s China attempted to persuade President Rahman to open up Bangladesh and democratize it. Moscow had been less and less willing to prop up Rahman’s regime, and Rahman realized that his power was waning. In 1981, after an attempted coup, Rahman relented and agreed to democratize as long as he was given assurances that he would not be persecuted by any future administrations. This was followed by Bangladesh signing the Shanghai Accords and Tehran Accords. Moscow was initially feisty about this, but they soon had their hands full with Agassi’s scandal. 

The 1980s were a brief golden age for Bangladesh, as tensions with their neighbors died down. China proved to be a far more willing trading partner than the USSR and ended up investing heavily in Bangladesh’s infrastructure and industrial capacity. Rahman’s replacement, Mahmud Chowdhury, was a lot more open to free trade - as long as it benefitted him and his government, of course. He also loosened up emigration and censorship laws, though labor laws suffered. With every year, the country was less socialist and more consumerist. Bangladesh’s fishing industry exploded, with advanced, cutting edge chemicals being added to the water to supposedly enhance the fertility of the fish. Bangladesh’s ports also became major trading hubs for shipping companies throughout southeast Asia and internationally. In 1983, President Chowdhury created a worker’s exchange program with China, with millions of Bengals moving to China to work in the numerous factories. This was actually to cover up the disastrous result of the December 27 Incident, in which a Chinese-built factory’s foundation sunk into the ground and ended up killing almost 50 people though many, many more were injured. The rivers of Bangladesh became so polluted that river fires were a common enough hazard to be included in weather reports. The government (along with several private companies trying to protect their investments) attempted multiple operations to clean the waterways but none were successful - instead, the state invested in complicated, expensive mitigation efforts rather than cutting back or enforcing pollution laws. 

Bangladesh remained neutral in the Sinai War, though they did express their support for the Egyptian Coalition. And like the rest of the world, their economy practically collapsed in the aftermath of the Crash of ‘88 and The Shock. Many migrant workers returned home, and Bangladesh rapidly became a crowded mess of swamps and decaying cities. President Chowdhury attempted to negotiate with China for aid, but then he received a mysterious missive from Moscow: Director Savateev, the KGB’s rising star, sent them evidence of China’s extermination of muslims and other ethnic minorities who had refused to renounce their faith. While President Chowdhury was initially skeptical about this, other, more vocal members of his government expressed their concern with this information. This year, China might demand their labor, but next year? Next year they could demand they give up their faith. 

Negotiations between Bangladesh and China quickly soured, with China giving up more and more concessions to keep trade alive. Ironically, this made the Bengals only more suspicious, and confirmed the paranoia of the more radical members of the Bengali government. Things came to a head in early 1989, when a group of far-right militants, inspired by the movements happening around the world, overthrew the Bengali government and established the “Islamic Republic of Bangladesh”. 

This period of Bengali history is not well documented, as the Islamic revolution spiraled out of control into a series of civil wars, coups, and infighting. By the end of 1989, the “Bengali Qatifist Party” emerged the winner by sheer brute force. Electrical infrastructure not already destroyed by the fighting or the weather was then dismantled as “altars of temptation”. When the Bengali Qatifists ran out of internal enemies, they started lashing out at their neighbors. Myanmar threatened an invasion several times, while Qatifist raiders frequently harassed Indian border guards. Incursions became so frequent that at one point, India had almost 100,000 personnel stationed across their various border fortifications. Bengali raiders, some of them Qatifists and others forgoing any religious pretext, preyed on ships in the Indian ocean. Much of Bangladesh’s mainland was dying and farms were withering from pollution or saltwater flooding, so fishing and raiding were the 170 million Bengal’s main source of sustenance and trade. 

Indonesia, China and India avoided the waters around Bangladesh but this caused the raiders to only strike farther and farther out. India participated in several bombing campaigns throughout the late 1990s, until finally, China, India and Indonesia, sick of being harassed by the seemingly endless flow of Bengali raiders, made an unlikely alliance and engaged in a brutal, bloody campaign to pacify Bangladesh. If Qatifist Bangladesh was a wasteland, Bangladesh in the aftermath could be described as about as desolate as the surface of the moon. It was then no surprise that Indonesia and China did not want to partition the conquered land, instead they did not even protest when India absorbed the land formerly known as Bangladesh. 

Bangladesh was a pyrrhic victory, as almost all of its land was usable, its infrastructure nonexistent, and constant flooding caused almost weekly resettlement. Still, India welcomed the extra land - they were rapidly running out of space. Bangladesh was annexed by India in 1999, officially as a “special military zone”, which equated to nothing more than intensive labor camps, penal farms and mobs of scavengers trying to sift through the ruins to get any bits of metal that hadn’t been washed away in the chronic floods. The Indian Army patrolled the waterways in loud, coal-powered boats and policed the survivors. Many slept on the ground, while the Army slept in their boats. 

Any semblance of law and order vanished after the Indo-Pakistani Nuclear War of 2002. General Vikram Rathore, who was in charge of the Indian forces in the Bengali Detention Zone, decided that Emergency Minister Singh no longer had any authority over him, as India didn’t exist any more. He then declared himself Emperor of Bengal, and seeking to expand his territory, he fell in battle in Calcutta. 

With this, Bangladesh became an anarchic free-for-all. Pro-Chinese Neo-Maoists fought the remnants of the Indian Army, Pakistani-style Islamic Socialists waged war on anyone expressing even remotely Qatifist-aligned views, and that was on top of the innumerable gangs of bandits, gangsters, smugglers, pirates, cultists and rebels. The waters of Bangladesh smelled of iron and salt for decades. 

By the Purple Summer of 2011, the last farms finally died out and Bangladesh became incapable of supporting any agriculture. Smuggling, raiding and cannibalism increased exponentially. More people died every year from dehydration than violence. At night, swarms of rabid cannibals chased down anyone they saw, eventually fighting each other in “hunger crusades”. In the largest of these groups, a cult began to form, one worshipping some long-forgotten god of death. These cannibals clashed with the death cults in India and Bhutan before dying out in the mid 2020s. 

As of 2027, Bangladesh is a wasteland filled with rotting, bleached bones and rivers stained red with blood. 
Sri Lanka

Official name: Republic of Sri Lanka (until 1990), Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (1990-1999), Indian Occupation of Sri Lanka (1999-2009) 
Capital: Colombo (until 1999), Kandy (1999-2009) 
Government Type: One Party Unitary State (until 1990), Totalitarian Dictatorship (1990-1999), Military Occupation (1999-2009) 
Population as of final census conducted: 32,874,281 (circa 2000)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: Uninhabitable
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $851.8 Billion USD
Primary Language: Sinhala
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: World Prosperity Alliance (until 1990)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

The JVP Insurrection of 1971 failed spectacularly, with the young, inexperienced Marxists failing to capture any provinces at all. The crippled USSR, still rebuilding itself after the death of Brezhnev, was unable to capitalize on this and could only watch as socialism was banned in all forms in Sri Lanka. Even stranger, as the dust settled a joint US-China stabilization mission arrived on the island not long after in 1972 and helped rebuild the lightly damaged infrastructure. 

Under immense pressure from the US, the socialist experiment of the Dominion of Ceylon ended and on May 22, 1972, the Republic of Sri Lanka was founded. Sirimavo Bandaranaike, the leader of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party and wife of the first Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, worked closely with the Nixon Administration to dismantle the “failed socialist experiment” that Ceylon had become. In its place was an American-style federal republic with a lucrative free market. In Sri Lanka’s first election, Dulan Wijesinghe of the United Nationalist Party became the country’s first president and was subsequently re-elected every election. 

In actuality though, the Republic of Sri Lanka was an oppressive one-party state with very little social services. Due to obscure amendments and by-laws, all in the name of preventing another Marxist uprising, the UNP’s opposition never made it big past the local elections. It wasn’t entirely draconian, though, as they still allowed barrier-free immigration and generous tax reductions for foreign investors. The new government focused on creating luxurious tourist traps and catering to visitors rather than improving the lives of their citizens. Many Sri Lankans emigrated abroad, mainly to work in India, the infant Zakat states, or China. 

India, wanting to usurp China as the industrial powerhouse of the world, heavily invested in Sri Lankan industry under the administration of Prime Minister Raghunath Prasad Malhotra. Prime Minister Malhotra and Chairman Chen begin playing a game of political checkers using Sri Lanka - for every resort or mineral refinery India invested in, China would invest in two more. Many ports became exclusively Indian or Chinese ports, with their products being shipped to either Chennai or Shanghai. The rivalry between the Chinese and Indian companies and shell companies was rather fierce, and by 1983, every single Sri Lankan company had been bought out by either an Indian or Chinese conglomerate. 

For the most part, the average Sri Lankan was fine with this. Working in tourist resorts or the service industry was basically identical regardless of which nationality the parent company belonged to, however for the more dangerous industrial jobs like mining or mineral refinement the experiences were vastly different. Indian-sponsored jobs tended to be much safer and more reliable work, but Chinese-sponsored jobs were less reliable, less safer, but paid much better. Many young Sri Lankans would fall for the lucrative siren song of working in a Chinese sapphire mine, and lose their life in the tunnels beneath Sri Lanka. Some of these sites would later become tourist attractions, with one company attempting to turn a mine outside of Bandarawela into an underground resort and theme park. 

As Sri Lanka continued to be exploited more and more by the giants in New Delhi and Beijing, a small but extremely vocal minority continued to rally against the regime allowing this to happen. Eventually, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam started to ally with these dissidents and ramped up their operations against the government. Protests and riots turned into deliberate sabotage operations, terrorist attacks, and finally, in 1988, the largest hostage crisis in the history of the world. 

On May 14, 1988, the Weerawila International Resort, Casino and Business Center was captured by a group of well-armed, well-trained and shockingly efficient army of Tamil Tigers. They were sporting what appeared to be a mixture of European, Chinese, Soviet, American and Indian weapons, along with extremely advanced electronic communications and cutting-edge ballistic armor. The terrorists apparently had insider knowledge of the layout of the resort as well as detailed schedules of security personnel, and were able to secure the campus within 13 minutes. By the time Sri Lankan authorities arrived at the scene, the resort had been turned into a fortress, with every entrance watched by snipers, mined with claymores, and patrolled by bomb-vest wearing guards. 

The first attempt to breach the resort happened just an hour after the building was taken over, when three Sri Lankan police officers attempted to sneak into the building to see just how many terrorists they were dealing with. As a warning of what would happen if further attempts were made, the leader of the terrorists, Sarathan Muralidevan, executed three hostages in the center of the resort. He then demanded, over loudspeaker, that every attempt to breach the compound would result in an entire floor of hostages being killed. 

The Weerawila International Resort, Casino and Business Center was a massive building, Sri Lanka’s crown jewel of tourist traps. It had been built by both Chinese and Indian companies, who had realized there was much more profit to be made if they worked together. The resort was almost 7,000 meters long and contained 37 hotels, 214 water parks, 156 theme parks, 1,476 restaurants, four zoos, three American-style shopping malls, and even an underground train system for the workers. The hotels had a total capacity of 100,000 people, but the actual grounds could hold well over 2 million. When the Tamil Tigers came in, only 78,904 people were there - most of them tourists from Europe, Israel, Canada and America. 

Part of Muralidevan’s demands also included at least one television crew to be active at the scene at all times, and that everyday, at noon Indian Standard Time, he would be granted one hour to express his views. If these demands were not met, he would demolish one floor of a hotel at a time, and after he had collapsed all of the hotels, he would blow up the park along with everyone in it. 

The Sri Lankan Hostage Crisis, sometimes referred to as just “the Crisis” because of how many people’s lives were on the line, instantly made national news. Multiple countries created entire committees of law enforcement officers with extensive training in hostage crisis negotiation, and caused an almost immediate shift in foreign policy. Many news channels offered around-the-clock coverage on the situation, featuring interviews with hostages who had let go, officers on the scene, foreign dignitaries, and later on, tourists and fans of Muralidevan. Almost every single television channel had a small box in the corner of the screen that cycled through updates on the Hostage Crisis. 

Behind the scenes, the United States and Western Europe both had the manpower and equipment to kick down the door and kill most of the terrorists before they could blow up the resort, but the governments of India and China both pressured them to hold back their troops. The resort represented a colossal investment of several nations, being valued at almost $20 trillion USD. 

Everyday, Muralidevan went on air and ranted for at least an hour about how hedonistic society had gotten, how godless everyone had become, how billions around the world were being exploited for the good of a few, and how both China and the USSR had failed at creating a “people’s state”. Every day he had something new to criticize, and everyday, he gained more fans. Ironically, he became a marketing icon. His face was plastered on anything from coffee mugs to T-shirts to even a brand of beer being named after him. Hundreds of people from all over the world, mainly women, started hanging posters of him on their wall - despite not understanding what he was saying, or even comprehending the reasons behind the hostage crisis. By the end of May, people began visiting Sri Lanka exclusively to see the site of the world’s largest hostage crisis. Security forces in Sri Lanka actually switched to preventing rabid fans from getting into the site rather than keeping the terrorists out. 

After each “Terror-Cast”, members of Interpol would negotiate with Muralidevan. Everyday, more hostages were released, and eventually supplies were airdropped in, but any attempt at getting the terrorists to stand down were met with executions and threats of further violence. That was until on June 8th, 1988, when President King and the President of the European Commission, Baron Friedrich von Schwerin of West Germany, announced that they had finally secured the release of all hostages and that the terrorists would stand down. Apparently, what had broken Muralidevan was when he found out that he had essentially been turned into a product. 

https://youtu.be/XHVymL9ar08?si=O6dBrW9CUg3kgAQn 

And just when the first hostages were being sent home, all eyes were glued to their screens as they watched the apocalyptic chaos breaking out in the Middle East. 

Sri Lanka became the site of one of the largest humanitarian crises in history, as airports, ports, buses and freeways became overwhelmed. Some were praying, others were taking advantage of the crisis and began looting businesses. Things got so bad that the United States sent a naval supercarrier to the island to help assist in evacuation efforts. Many nations were so focused on making sure the former hostages made it home safely that they did not pay attention to the immediate aftermath. 

The Tamil Tigers, enraged at the humiliation they had faced when the greatest terrorist attack in history was foiled by just a few t-shirts and fan letters, launched an all-out uprising against the Sri Lankan government. The Indian-Sri Lankan highway was bombed, and Indian forces assisted the Sri Lankan army. The early days of the civil war wasn’t so much a civil war as it was just anarchy. Many believed the world was ending. Fires burned and places of worship were packed, while others simply tried to get on with their day. Both Indian and Sri Lankan forces deserted to be with their families. 

When it was clear that the world was in fact, not ending (at least in Sri Lanka) the government engaged in a massive counter-attack and took back much of the coast from the socialist rebels. By the end of 1988, the Sri Lankan government, assisted by both Indian and Chinese troops, the rebels had been forced underground and the Chinese left. Refugees from the Qatifist chaos in the Middle East were resettled in south Asia, including Sri Lanka - and this is where the rebels found their new advantage. Convinced that they would create a buddhist Zakat state, several refugees joined the socialists and served as spies, allies and soldiers. On top of that, evidence suggests that the Soviet Union began smuggling weapons to Sri Lanka to arm the rebels. 

In 1989, it was clear that the world was changing and for the worse. Countries were far more hesitant to work together, and the only thing that kept India supporting Sri Lanka was the fear that the chaos would spill onto the mainland. The Crash of ‘88 and the Shock were only making things harder. As living standards plummeted, the idea of a socialist state sounded much more appealing to the average Sri Lankan, who were usually unemployed as tourism and the service industry had taken a permanent nosedive. Everyday, more people joined the Tamil Tigers, and everyday, government forces were pushed further and further. 

By the start of 1990, the Tamil Tigers controlled almost 75% of the island, with government forces being concentrated in Colombo. Over the past two years, Colombo had been turned into an absolute fortress, a maze of checkpoints, barbed wire, and concrete. Unless the rebels suddenly received a fleet of bomber planes (which was unlikely given the current fuel crisis), they did not have the manpower to successfully breach the militarized city. And so they simply waited. 

The Siege of Colombo lasted from September 9, 1989 to July 14, 1990. By October 1989, all routes into the city were controlled by Tamil forces, cutting off the government from their supply depots. India initially provided supplies to the Sri Lankans, but after a famine was projected to rock the country in 1990, the government decided to suspend all aid to Sri Lanka. Disease ravaged the city in February 1990, followed by food riots in March of 1990 and martial law being declared in April of 1990. In June, rumors of an uprising circulated, before finally being put into motion in July. The government forces were hung from lampposts, with Dulan Wijesinghe being hung in gallows constructed in Independence Square. The last of the government forces surrendered on July 14, 1990. 

The Tamil Tigers proclaimed victory and immediately set about to create a socialist state. All shortcomings and resource shortages were blamed on the previous government, who had sold out the Sri Lankan people to the Indians and Chinese. As this new government formed, a man by the name of Ravindra Senaratne seized control. In the name of unity and preventing tyranny, he assumed complete executive control of the fledgling Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Members of the old government were purged, followed by those with Pro-Indian, Pro-Chinese or Pro-Soviet sympathies. And then, people were just killed for being at the wrong place at the wrong time. Massive soviet-style gulags and labor camps were built in the countryside and industry stagnated. The many resorts were turned into sterile apartments and prisons. 

Agriculture became the primary focus of this new regime, but severe ground pollution from mining and chemical spills caused much of the land to be unfarmable. This didn’t stop the government, though - they simply claimed the farmers weren’t truly believing in the “cause of Sri Lankan Socialism”. Rolling black-outs and power shortages coated the island in darkness. Senaratne claimed that all of this was temporary, that once Sri Lanka was back on her feet he would relinquish power and create the perfect democratic socialist society, one that never knew hunger and one that was truly egalitarian. 

For the most part, the extreme draconian measures kept starvation at a minimum - so many people were killed in purges, heatwaves or natural disasters that very few people died from lack of food. The intensive farming provided just enough food that rebellion wasn’t on many people’s minds, and some actually believed that all of this austerity was necessary to create a perfect socialist state. 

The fragile peace was kept until 1994, when a massive famine caused extreme levels of rationing and thousands dead from food riots. Senaratne, knowing his power was at risk, threatened to invade India… unless India gave them 1 million kg of food. India initially ignored them, but when Sri Lankan ships began harassing Indian fishing vessels, Emergency Minister Singh relented and sent them the food. It was all a ploy, of course - Singh had his back up against the wall and was facing calls for his removal from power, and to pacify the more humanitarian members of the Indian government, he relented and sent the shipment to spin it as a humanitarian gesture. 

The food shipment did help, for a time, but Sri Lanka found it was much more efficient to turn to “priviteering” - much like how the ancient British government sanctioned piracy against their enemies, the Sri Lankan government authorized both civilian and military vessels to harass, raid and plunder coastal settlements and sea-faring ships. Bangladesh and Sri Lanka had several naval battles in the Indian ocean, but Sri Lanka was far more cautious about targeting larger, more powerful navies such as Malaysia, Indonesia, Pakistan, and China. The ruins of the Maldives were a frequent destination for the Sri Lankan privateers, usually to scavenge for food and ammunition. 

India was not taking this lying down, and built several large naval bases along their coast to help police against the Sri Lankan privateers. Naval battles between Indian-operated fishing vessels and fleets of Sri Lankan raiding boats caused a significant disruption in the supply chain in India, so much so that by 1998 India had complete control of the Bay of Bengal. 

Senaratne had been preparing for this outcome for a while and on May 6, 1999, he launched a proper invasion of India. He had significantly overestimated the military capabilities of India, and on May 17, 1999 he surrendered only to be killed when Colombo was leveled by Indian naval forces. The Indian army swept across the island and completely demilitarized it, turning it into an advanced industrial center - since the ground was already so polluted, India decided to utilize it to its fullest extent and within months, smog blanketed the entire island. Sri Lankan prisoners of war were forced to comb through the ruins on the island and scavenge for bits of metal, wood, anything that could be used to keep India’s economy running. 

After the collapse of Singh’s government in the Indo-Pakistani Nuclear War of 2002, the remnants of the Sri Lankan Occupational Authority remained loosely allied with the government remnants in Kerala and the western coast of India. A record number of soldiers deserted in the aftermath of the war, going back to the mainland to see if their families had survived. Those that stayed behind were either sadistic, power-addicted maniacs and a few who still genuinely believed in India’s mission of maintaining stability at any cost. 

A loose alliance between Kerala and Sri Lanka kept the two areas functioning - Kerala provided rations while Sri Lanka manufactured supplies and ammunition. Every year, more Sri Lankans were killed, either by bored Indian soldiers or by heatwaves. In 2007, after China came through and razed what was left of India, the remaining Sri Lankans staged an uprising and launched a rebellion against the Indian occupiers. Many atrocities were committed - India burnt down several towns and forced millions of Sri Lankans to work to the death. However, the Indians were few, and the Sri Lankans were many, and on December 27 2009 the last Indians were killed or driven off the island. 

The survivors inherited a broken, polluted rock in the middle of a churning, violent ocean. Every single day, storms and typhoons would batter the island, getting stronger and stronger. Torrential rain washed away the ruins of hundreds of settlements. The extensive mining conducted in the 20th century along with the biblical rainstorms caused landslides and sinkholes to open up all over the island. 

But still, a few scavengers refused to abandon their home and set up tiny self-sufficient enclaves in the central mountains. Eventually all of their stockpiles of food would run low and contact was established with the Keralan Junta. The old trading alliance was restored, but this time Kerala gave them mysterious green crackers and other heavily processed rations. Scrap metal from Sri Lanka was untouched by radiation and was thus very valuable, with the Keralan survivors paying handsomely for the detritus. The Sri Lankans battled the encroaching ocean to get the rusted sheets before the waters swept them away, going further and further into dangerous, unstable areas to keep themselves fed. 

By the 2020s, these storms had gotten so destructive that many finally fled the island and took their luck on the mainland. Every day, a group of holdouts would be swept into the sea or be swallowed up in a sink hole. Evidence suggests that the last group of survivors left the island before the end of 2023. 

As of 2027, Sri Lanka is a desolate, storm-ravaged wasteland picked over by only the most desperate of scavengers. 
Nepal

Official name: Kingdom of Nepal (until 1991), Indian Emergency Regime of Nepal (1991-2011)
Capital: Kathmandu
Government Type: Semi-Constitional Monarchy (until 1991), Military Occupation (1991-2011) 
Population as of final census conducted: 42,233,498 (circa 2000)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 700,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $42.7 Billion USD
Primary Language: Nepali
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: World Prosperity Alliance (until 1988)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

King Mahendra held on to the Panchayat system as long as he could. As the world opened up and became more and more democratized, Mahendra was pressured by various world leaders - among them President Nixon and Chairman Chen - to follow suit and join this new, highly interconnected world. Despite the advances in medical technology, King Mahendra suffered several debilitating heart attacks throughout the early 1970s until he finally went into a coma after his 5th heart attack on September 30, 1974. His son, Birendra, succeeded him and was crowned on February 24, 1975. 

King Birendra was far more open to the modernization of Nepal. Throughout the late 1970s, he held several meetings and summits with various representatives from China, the United States, Europe, the Arab world, and finally India. As the Emergency ended and President Malhotra started his grand reforms of the Indian state, he made many overtures to King Birendra. India believed that maintaining good relations with their neighbors was essential to their continued stability in the face of a rapidly industrializing China - one that could easily sweep over the Asian continent if they so chose. 

Like Sri Lanka, Nepal was the next game of political chess between India and China. This only intensified when King Birendra held a referendum in 1980 and the Panchayat system was dissolved - in its place was a semi-constitutional monarchy, and the first elections were held in August of 1981. 

Two major parties emerged: the monarchy-endorsed Royal Party, which was supported by India and several other Non-Aligned Nations, and the other party was the People’s Party, which was supported by China, and to a lesser extent the USA and Europe. The People’s Party was a strictly modernist party, one that promoted atheism, agnosticism, secularism, and economic policies aligned with Chen’s “capitalism with Chinese characteristics”. The People’s Party also advocated for barrier-free immigration so that the people of Nepal could work abroad in Indian or Chinese factories. Meanwhile, the Royal Party was far more conservative both economically and politically. They strived for “democracy with Hindu principles” and deep respect for King Birendra. Part of the new system ceded much of the monarchy’s power to the elected representatives, and the Royal Party wished to provide minimal resistance against King Birendra’s goals. 

The results of the first election were heavily contested, but verified as both free and fair by several outside observers such as representatives from Switzerland, South Korea, and Argentina. The new government of Nepal was split right down the middle between Royal Party loyalists and People’s Party progressivists. The first action the government voted on was signing the Shanghai Accords - which passed on November 14, 1981 with a 74% majority. 

Nepal slowly morphed into a rather unique country - it was still deeply religious and remained closely tied, culturally and religiously, to India. However, despite their resistance to secularism, Nepal became extremely close to China. Almost 15 million Nepalese emigrated to China to work in factories, while 9 million traveled to India, mainly to work on the foreign-owned cattle farms. 

On June 25, 1984, Nepal formally left the Non-Aligned Movement and joined the World Prosperity Alliance, firmly placing them in China’s economic sphere of influence. In 1987, Nepal saw a brief surge in tourism as warmer winters made the mountain climate much more pleasant. 

After the Crash of ‘88 and the Shock, the rapid economic downturn forced many Nepali migrant workers to return home. A majority of politicians in the People’s Party, becoming disillusioned with China’s consumerist policies, jumped ship to the Royal Party to save face. Others simply became independent, advocating for policies suspiciously absent of mentions of China. 

King Birendra called a snap election and the Royal Party overwhelmingly dominated the new government. Numerous trade deals were signed with India, along with a few military alliances. Trade with India helped the Nepalese stave off major resource shortages, but electricity and fuel became rationed. Most of the country stood firmly behind King Birendra and approved of the measures he was taking - mainly by pretending that China didn’t exist. 

This angered most of the hardcore People’s Party supporters, who loudly shouted (to anyone that would listen) that the country was regressing and only firmly aligned with China and the West could Nepal get out of this mess. However, even they were silenced when China began to perform military exercises along their border. 

With each week, the quality of life declined. Businesses closed each day. Dozens of half-built resorts were shut down and later turned into housing for the homeless. Fuel prices surged, and as the winters became noticeably warmer, melting snow and glaciers caused landslides in several small towns. 

About a year after the Crash, in June of 1989, civil unrest gradually increased. A growing number of citizens were angered by the lack of welfare policies and the lack of employment opportunities. Protests and marches dominated the streets of Kathmandu. Some of these turned into riots, with agitators advocating for a “strictly Maoist” government and a centrally planned economy. King Birendra, worried that this would affect his relations with India, clamped down hard on these protestors. This only further emboldened them, and led to the Kodari Uprising on August 26, 1989, where a group of pro-Maoist rebels took over several local government buildings. 

These “uprisings” spread and King Birendra made several more treaties with India, asking for additional military support in exchange for even more favorable trading rates. Indian peacekeeping forces arrived in late November 1989, and participated in several campaigns to retake captured cities. Nepal slipped further and further into India’s sphere of influence, giving up parts of their sovereignty in exchange for supplies and security assistance. 

Things remained tenuous at best, with the government of Nepal barely retaining control of the country. That was until the Hot Summer of 1990, when due to famines in India, supply shipments dried up and several soldiers were recalled to help deal with the fallout. The rebels, now encompassing a huge coalition of factions united only in their desire to see King Birendra deposed, launched a massive civil war. India did what they could to help support the crumbling regime, but with the support of China, the rebels made massive gains. On December 26, 1990, King Birendra was killed during the Battle of Kathmandu. Many pro-government forces surrendered after that and on January 13, 1991, spillover from the violence reached India. 

The “pacification” of the “Nepal problem” was one of the first goals of Emergency Minister Singh, who finally annexed Nepal on December 2, 1991. Due to the extreme unrest in the area, it remained an extremely militarized part of India. Hundreds of military bases were built along with the border with China and checkpoints guarded water pipelines. Suspected rebels were sent to work in labor camps or were straight up executed. Many of the survivors of the old government collaborated with India, and were allowed to keep their positions in return. As the climate became warmer every year, many high-ranking members of the Indian government and military moved to occupied Nepal. While food was hard to grow in the mountainous environment, the constantly melting snow and glaciers meant that water was never in short supply. 

After the Indo-Pakistani Nuclear War of 2002, General Arjun Pratap, the commander of Occupied Nepal, openly criticized Singh’s “monumentally stupid” use of nuclear weapons and declared that he was no longer fit to govern India. General Pratap’s faction, the Indian Emergency Regime of Nepal, remained one of the more stable factions to emerge from the nuclear conflict. Their high concentration of military equipment along with controlling several hundred water pipelines made them very influential in the ruins of India. 

General Pratap sought to counter the growing madness of Singh and engaged in several campaigns to retake parts of North India. At one point, the Indian Emergency Regime stretched as far south as Nagpur and controlled much of the remaining arable land in India. These campaigns were initially successful until groups of raiders and Samsarists started targeting Pratap’s forces. With each battle, more land was lost, and famines and droughts spurred uprisings. The Purple Summer of 2011 put an end to this, as while Pratap was focused on retaking parts of Bihar, a group of Nepalese soldiers staged a coup and took control of Nepal’s remaining pipelines and reservoirs. They believed that the Indians were hoarding all of the water and letting the Nepalese die of dehydration, and took matters into their own hands, completely unaware of the heatwave crippling the world’s water supply. 

Later, Pratap was killed by a Singh loyalist outside of Kanpur and any sense of order broke down, as the Indian Emergency Regime splintered into several hundred warlords and bandits seeking to control the rapidly dwindling supply of water. 

For several years, Nepal was a warzone. Massacres and executions forced millions to flee only to be eaten by starving peasants, bandits, and even Samsarists. By the time of the First Great Heatwaves in 2015, Nepal had a population of less than 2 million. Only the toughest, most resourceful bandits and raiders remained, but the promise of nearly unlimited water was very tempting indeed. These groups continued to war against each other for years, eventually creating their own isolated fiefdoms where tiny, sickly crops grew in walled-off farms. 

As of 2027, less than one million remain in the peaks of what used to be Nepal, many who consider Civilization to have ended in 2002. 
Bhutan

Official name: Kingdom of Bhutan (until 1989), Socialist Republic of Bhutan (1989-1991), State of Bhutan (1991-1997), Indian Occupation of Bhutan (1997-2002)
Capital: Thimphu (until 1989), Wangdue Phodrang (1989-2002)
Government Type: Absolute Monarchy (until 1989), Far-Left Authoritarian Dictatorship (1989-1991), Anarchist Theocracy (1991-1997), Military Occupation (1997-2002) 
Population as of final census conducted: 896,597 (circa 2000)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 15,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.73 Billion USD
Primary Language: Dzongkha
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: World Prosperity Alliance (until 1991)
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

Bhutan remained a rather destitute and isolated place, even with the Shanghai and Tehran Accords. Bhutan’s economy was incredibly tiny, even for a Glorious Decades era nation, being based entirely around subsistence farming and animal husbandry. While it had more natural resources than other poor nations like Bolivia or Mauritania, many simply forgot that Bhutan even existed. 

Bhutan, eager to gain more influence and thus more wealth, was among the first nations to recognize Bangladesh as an independent state. This caused some ire with India but ultimately Prime Minister Gandhi had enough on her mind and said several statements that amounted to nothing more than “a final pre-emptive warning of starting the process of severing diplomatic ties” between the two states. 

One of the reasons why Bhutan remained so isolated and unpopular was how oppressive and authoritarian King Dasho Sonam Dorji was. After assassinating Jigme Singye Wangchuck during his coronation in June of 1974, Dasho Sonam Dorji proclaimed himself the rightful monarch of Bhutan and clamped down hard on his opposition. He had all the members of the Wangchuck family publicly executed as a show of power. Further displays of authoritarianism and autocracy isolated Bhutan from the world stage, and the state became treated in a manner similar to Yugoslavia, North Korea, Myanmar and Taiwan - a tiny, insignificant state with no cultural, political, economic or military power. 

King Dasho Sonam’s foreign policy started out as peaceful and welcoming, but over time morphed into a paranoid game of chess that manipulated neighboring states into giving foreign aid to his people. Pakistan, Bangladesh, India and China all fell into his little game, which resulted in Bhutan joining the World Prosperity Alliance in 1980 despite not having any major industrial centers. The King even “loaned” workers to China in exchange for additional supplies and cheaper trade deals. 

In the 1980s though, the King had seen just how rich and luxurious other states had gotten, and so he tried to loosen up Bhutan to let in some of that wealth. He started an ambitious economic project to increase tourism to Bhutan, starting with numerous “state parks” and later on planned resorts. What surprised him though was the demographic of tourists: mainly Indian and Malaysian Buddhists, coming to see the various temples around the nation. This seemed to be the missing link, and once Bhutan was promoted as the “Buddhist Capital of the World”, tourism skyrocketed. King Dasho Sonam even attempted to create Buddhist “gift shops”, though these were not successful at all. What was successful were “meditation classes” and guided retreats. When the Great Way Temple of Thimphu was completed in 1986, foreign tourism increased by 950%. Indian and Malaysian Buddhists were no longer the primary demographic - instead, it was mainly business executives from North America, Europe and Japan, participating in corporate retreats and team building exercises. 

The Crash of ‘88 didn’t affect Bhutan all that much, as their economy was still heavily agriculturally based and their attempt in tourism had only barely started to expand. Tourism was still present - however it was mainly just Indian Buddhists now, who were secretly content that the “fake Buddhists” had all vanished over the span of a month. 

And yet, despite their relatively stable condition, many were upset at King Dasho Sonam for the continued poverty and poor living conditions. As the quality of life started to get worse and not better, unrest gradually grew until a full on revolution on August 7, 1989 broke out. An uprising in the Royal Palace, led by a socialist guerilla named Tenzin Namgyal Thondup, resulted in King Dasho Sonam Dorji being executed on August 11, 1989. The civil war escalated significantly after that with the Royal Bhutanese Army desperately trying to regain control of cities across the state. During the Battle of Gelephu, several Indian Buddhists were held hostage by the secular socialists. 

Despite Malhotra talking a big talk and claiming to use force when necessary, the Indian Army negotiated with the Socialists and secured their freedom. MP Singh, Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha, used this one of his main talking points to criticize the Malhotra administration, saying that choosing to negotiate with the Socialists legitimized their coup. Support for an invasion of Bhutan grew, but with the Sri Lankan Civil War happening (relatively) closer to home, Singh was unable to get enough votes to authorize an invasion. 

The Socialist Republic of Bhutan was a very short-lived state, lasting less than two years. The interim socialist government of Thondup was initially supported by the USSR until he refused to enact full communism, instead creating a system he described as “agriculture with socialist characteristics". With this, Yanayev pulled the plug on their aid and left the new government to their fate as heatwaves and famines ravaged the country in 1990. Quality of life decreased further. Many Bhutanese, having been disillusioned with King Dasho Sonam’s empty promises and Leader Thondup’s reforms, turned to Buddhism as a way of coping with the horrible state of the world. Pure Land Buddhism became very popular, as people from all over the world wished to be reborn in a land purified from disease, corruption and hunger. 

This led to a small group of Buddhists advocating for a government focused on spiritual fulfilment, as both the monarchy and the socialists had not improved the quality of life. If the quality of life could not be improved, the only thing the government could do was help prepare its citizens for the next life. A new school of thought emerged - described roughly as “reaching heaven through violence”. In a world so corrupted with violence, using violence in a manner to attempt to achieve nirvana would be preferable, as those that fall would be reincarnated to a better world. 

This movement, eventually known as “Samsarism”, grew in members until it vastly outnumbered the Socialists. On January 26, 1991, Leader Thondup was captured by Samsarists and underwent “forced reincarnation”. The leader of this movement, known only as The Last Guru, turned the ruins of Bhutan into a totalitarian theocracy that made Pakistan look as secular as China. 

Under The Last Guru, it is estimated at least 50,000 people were forcibly reincarnated every year. Those that remained became more radical and extreme in their mission to escape this life, and so rogue Samsarists spread to places in war-town Indochina, starving India and even China to spread their “way out”. This Buddhist-promoted violence helped legitimize Singh’s rule, and India engaged in numerous pacification campaigns against the Samsarists. China even used a similar excuse, stating that their expansion into Indochina was to end the Samsaran violence. 

Finally, on May 27, 1997, India invaded and annexed Bhutan, turning it into a massive military detention camp. An enormous amount of troops were required to maintain control of the region, as the Samsarists frequently launched uprisings against the Indian invaders. In 1998, despite the huge amount of arable land, Indian forces engaged in a massive scorched earth campaign to make it harder for the Samsarists to fight back. Indian authorities attempted to relocate the suspected Samsarists, but that only resulted in their ideology spreading to other prisoners. 

When India and Pakistan destroyed each other in nuclear war, the Samsarists used this as further evidence that the world was dying and that mankind’s only hope was to escape to a more pure land through reincarnation. The remaining Samsarists overthrew the confused, disorganized Indian occupation force and significantly ramped up their reincarnation plans. 

After the war, the Samsarists spread throughout the Indian wasteland, waging war against other cults and bandits. Samsarists were one of the more unique cults during the late Black Ages in that they refused to partake in cannibalism, as this was seen as prolonging suffering. Instead, when it became clear that supplies were running out, the members of a group of Samsarists would partake in one night of excessive pleasure and consumption before engaging in ritual suicide. 

Because of this rather morbid outlook on the world, the movement died out over time, with the original cult in Bhutan all committing ritual suicide in 2015 during the Great Heat Wave. After that, Bhutan became a barren wasteland, occasionally picked over by bandits and scavengers. A few outposts of survivors remained in the more isolated valleys and mountains, occasionally fighting off Chinese deserters, islamic warlords, and Yama cultists. 

In the 2020s, many of these survivor groups allied together to create a tiny, informal confederacy focused on protecting the enclaves. This alliance was only partially successful as raiding parties became more common and larger in number, causing as much as half of the valley to become violent anarchy. 

The Holocene Hyperwave actually put an end to this, as the extreme humidity in the surrounding area below the mountains caused much of the raiders to die off. The alliance broke apart and while the city-states remained more or less friendly with each other, they did not work together to mitigate the water shortages. Other areas were instead ravaged by famine and desertification as a result of the Indian army’s actions in 1998. 

As of 2027, the tiny survivor group in Bhutan is still eking out a miserable existence, either being devastated by floods caused by melting glaciers, or starving as a result of the rapidly dwindling arable land. 
Seychelles

Official name: State of Seychelles (until 1999), Most Holy Kingdom of Mike (1999-2017), Federal Kingdom of Brigid (2017-2027)
Capital: Victoria (until 1999), Mikestown (1999-2017), Brigidtopia (2017-2027)
Government Type: Mercenary State (until 1999), Absolute Monarchy (1999-2027) 
Population as of final census conducted: 10,243 (circa 2020)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 3,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $284 Billion USD
Primary Language: Seychellois Creole, English, French, “Mikish”
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Unaligned 
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial

Maldives

Official name: Republic of the Maldives (until 1988), State of the Maldives (1988-1989)
Capital: Malé
Government Type: Presidential Republic (until 1988), Mercenary State (1988-1989)
Population as of final census conducted: 410,158 (circa 1980)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: Uninhabitable
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $178 Billion USD
Primary Language: Dhivehi
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: Unaligned
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten
Pakistan

Official name: Islamic Socialist Republic of Pakistan (until 1992), Emergency Order of Pakistan (1992-2002) 
Capital: Islamabad 
Government Type: Islamic Theocracy (until 1992), Military Junta (1992-2002)
Population as of final census conducted: 352,501,542 (circa 2000)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 48,400,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $62.385 Billion USD
Primary Language: Urdu
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES
Alignment: COMECON (until 1983), League for Arab Cooperation (1983-1992)
Great Death Survival Rating: Remnant
India

Official name: Republic of India (until 1991), Provisional Government of India (1991-2002), North India Authority (2002-2007) 
Capital: New Delhi (until 2002), Kanpur (2002-2007, disputed) 
Government Type: Federal Parliamentary Republic (until 1991), Authoritarian Dictatorship (1991-2002), Authoritarian Confederacy (2002-2007)
Population as of final census conducted: 2,539,738,784 (circa 2000)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 250,000,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $2.98 Trillion USD
Primary Language: Hindi, English
Member of the Alliance of Nations: YES
Alignment: Unaligned
Great Death Survival Rating: Partial


https://youtu.be/ZFKDbOmvgfo?si=BALdrbWK33yFrDnp 
Interlude
The Shock
Excerpt from “The Blood of the Earth: The Economic Downfall of the Pre-Great Death Societies” by Alaric O’Braunfels, Munich Press, 972 ASJ


Photograph of an abandoned oil well located in North Dakota, 1997

https://youtu.be/KjWd5WetF8c?si=wE6KnsMPQC88XgLX 

After the Sinai War of 1988, over 90% of the world’s crude oil supplies went up in flames. Fires burned indiscriminately for almost a century, and now, much of the former Middle East and parts of North Africa are vast fields of grey-green glass, mountains of ash and scorching sands. Very few live in that part of the world now, but in the areas that remain, huge treasure troves of information from this era have been uncovered. 

Many countries in the world were not so concerned about the massive loss of life as they were for the monumental loss of oil. The dirt-cheap oil from Iran, plus the Three Mile Island incident and the subsequent lobbying by Big Oil, had made almost every single country entirely dependent on oil not only for their infrastructure, but their economy as well. Oil-based products were ubiquitous - just about everything was made from oil in some way, be it the rubber and synthetic fibers made for clothing, electronic insulation materials, disposable plastic bags for food, and even medicines and fertilizers were made in processes utilizing petroleum. 

And so, it was a massive shock to the rest of the world when suddenly the price of everything jumped. Medical equipment inflated by almost 2,500%, and kept climbing. Many pharmacies went out of business by 1995. Rubber used for manufacturing cars nosedived, and the last tires were made by 1991, with everything afterwards made using recycled rubber. Rubber was later collected and hoarded by the remaining industries after 2000, as it was needed for making hoses and gaskets for valuable machinery such as filtration systems and pumps. Electronics miniaturization was permanently reversed, as with the exponential increase to electricity bills, industries no longer prioritized making objects such as computers and monitors smaller and smaller. Instead of using plastics to insulate their products, they now had to use heavy, bulky ceramics and metals. These materials also would hold on to heat for longer periods of time, requiring computers and other essential electronics to become larger and larger. It also, unfortunately, made them more dangerous, as chipped ceramics and heated metal caused industrial accidents to slowly but gradually increase. Hundreds of thousands of companies went bankrupt between 1988-1992, and entire industries went completely extinct, never to be revived again. Telecommunications are only just now making a comeback, in the 30th century. 


Train yard outside of Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1990. Many of these trains would never run again. 

The first area to be affected by this massive drop in fuel was of course the transportation network that had connected the world during the Glorious Decades. When an American bought a pack of cigarettes from a store, they were buying tobacco from Brazil, paper made from trees in Zaire, placed in an embossed plastic box manufactured in China, and shipped using Iranian oil across the United States to be bought at a gas station in Olympia, Washington. 

By the end of the summer of 1988, not even a year after the Sinai War, the Crash and the Shock, global trade had practically vanished. Many countries were busy trying to keep their essential industries and commuter networks running, and had no resources for international shipping and exporting. Shipping all but dried up by 2000, and until then they carried only the most essential supplies such as crude oil, food imports, fertilizers and raw metals. By 2010, many cargo ships had been disassembled for parts, or were turned into housing for the poor, like in New York City. 

Personal automobiles had fallen out of favor within a few years of the Crash, and instead, many governments opted for mass public transportation programs. Oil and later coal powered buses dominated the streets of American metropolises until the late 2000s, while in places like the European Federation, Nordic Union, UK and Japan saw electric powered trains and rail lines. The UKs were shut down in late 2009, while the Federation shut down theirs in 2014, citing “increased terrorist activity”. Japan’s public transportation system held on the longest, as it was only shut down in 2024 during the Second Great Heat Wave. In other countries, like the USSR, China, and Patagonia, many people lived close enough to where they worked that commuting wasn’t an issue, and in the rare cases it was, horse-drawn carriages and rickshaws became the dominant method of transporting workers to and from their homes. 

Planes remained in use, though only for the very, very rich. Cargo planes, mainly running on a mixture of dirty liquid coal and natural gas, frequently transported important plutocrats across the USA and European Federation, respectively. In other places, such as Australia and the USSR, blimps had actually begun to see a comeback and replaced the conventional aircraft of their militaries - by 2027, only the USSR, Australia and New Zealand, Japan and the Patagonian Alliance had functional air forces. 


Two women in the Great American Dust Bowl in 2024, wearing clothing made in the early 1990s

Clothing was the most visible casualty of this massive drop of oil supplies. Much of fashion, from not just the west but around the world, relied on synthetic dyes and oil-based looms. A lack of reliable fertilizers, and worldwide famines, led to most textile plants such as cotton, linen, and hemp (which was still illegal, but this hadn’t been seriously enforced since 1989) to see reduced yields as arable land was prioritized for growing food for the now stagnant and decaying metropolises. Of course, for the very rich, they could still buy new synthetic clothing and silks, but the most expensive thing was dyes. In the 1990s, having obnoxiously colored clothing was a sign of wealth, as opposed to the Glorious Decades, when it was considered tacky to wear such obnoxious clothing. Instead, many in the 1970s and 1980s in the west wore suits and dresses made from silk and leather, while only the very poor were forced to wear these synthetic clothes made with bright, neon colors. 

This led to a massive shift in how clothing was viewed and worn. Previously, anyone could buy a new set of tuxedos for about the same price as a cheeseburger, and when a hole showed up, they’d simply buy a new one. However, after the Crash, new clothing became frighteningly expensive. Materials, both synthetic and natural, dwindled in supply and soon, everyone was thrifting. This led to a period from 1988-1991 when everyone was wearing second-hand clothing from a variety of different fashion periods. Some men even chose to wear dresses. In the 1990s, many people only bought one or two new clothes a year, usually for special occasions like weddings, graduations, or other big celebrations. But by the 2000s, many were too poor to afford new clothes at all. The Smith Administration introduced a minor program in 2003 that focused on this, as the civil unrest in the South had significantly reduced the supply of cotton and other textiles. With this program, called the American Clothing Act of 2003, granted all Americans one free set of clothing a year, and gave them up to five coupons for repairs that could be exchanged at any clothing store. This program showed some promise, but after the Kentucky-based Bowling Green Textiles Company bought up all the working textile mills, Government-Issue clothing became far more drab. This led to a brief period between 2007-2014 where clothing was made from a patchwork of different styles, textiles, and colors, referred to as “rainbow style”. Severe wear-and-tear from the elements, pollution and from being handed down to so many people led to many of these patchwork clothes to break down by the mid 2010s. On top of that, the supplies used to repair textiles were in very short supply by this point, and BGTC had monopolized the remaining supply shops. In 2015, they changed their policy so that only BGTC-manufactured clothes would be repaired at their shops, and only then if they hadn’t been modified by the owners. With the loss of dyes, this led to a dramatic decrease in variety and color for clothing, with many people now wearing simple, undyed cotton clothing that eventually became eternally stained a dull brown through years of exposure to sweat, acid rain, and pollution. 

Other countries had seen similar changes in fashion, though some of them weren’t all a result of supply shortages. In the Soviet Union, for example, all citizens were required to wear denim jackets and pants, dyed red with beets, while soldiers and police were required to wear dress uniforms when not on active duty. In Europe, people wore light shirts and shorts made from linen, to help keep their bodies cool. In much of Latin America and Africa, the death rate was high enough that there was a steady supply of second-hand clothing, but when new clothing was made, it was usually made from hemp, as many cartels grew it on the side. One exception is in the Patagonian Alliance, where many citizens wore austere but comfortable wool clothing made from Argentine goats, alpacas and llamas. In Australia and New Zealand, their main textile was actually a mix of leather and synthetic fibers from recycled materials from the Glorious Decades - as their populations were extremely small, they could afford to make and reuse the old materials from that time. In China, however, they used whatever they could find - cotton, hemp, linen, and as some reports implied, human hair. Clothing was always in short supply in China - it was not uncommon to see children as young as 10 running around naked, never having worn clothing in their life. Japan went through a similar fashion cycle as the USA, though they settled on robes and kimonos evocative of feudal Japan. 


Food, Inc Corn Farm #5634-6745N, located outside of North Platte, Nebraska. Photographed 2023

Another industry that was completely crippled by the death spiral of oil supplies was the agricultural industry. In many poorer countries in Africa, Latin America and South Asia, farming systems broke down by 1991 as the heat and humidity caused many tractors, mills, and other farming equipment to stop working. Because so many of these machines were entirely dependent on oil, they also stopped working throughout the 1990s. This forced much of the world to tend to their crops by hand - a time-consuming process that suffered the risk of heat stroke. Other, richer countries, like the Big Four, were able to keep their agricultural equipment running into the late 2000s, with research conducted into making steam and coal powered farming equipment. These jury-rigged tractors and combine harvesters carried the risk of exploding and setting the whole field on fire, and also decreased the yield of the harvest by contaminating the ground. 

But another major problem arose by the turning of the second millennium - the dramatic decrease in fertilizer production. In order to meet demand in the ever-growing cities, without fertilizers to reinvigorate the ground, many farms had to make bigger and bigger fields crammed with crops. In the 1990s, vermin such as moles, gophers, and rats were drawn to the plants, and insecticides were too expensive to produce. Some farms began building walls around their fields, and by 1995, many employed armed guards to routinely hunt for rodents. After the Great American Famine of 2000, these guards now also protected the crops from thieves and starving homeless. Without the fertilizers, the farmers had to work the ground harder and harder every year, until in the late 90s, a massive dust bowl started to form in Oklahoma, climbing all the way up to Montana by 2027. 

Industrial fertilizers were still able to be produced, of course, just in an incredibly small amount. The farms that initially bought all these fertilizers were the ones owned by Food, Inc, and because they were able to produce more food (and thus sell more), they put the other farms out of business. By 2004, Food, Inc had an effective monopoly on the synthetic fertilizer supply in the United States, but even then, other farms got by using older, more tried and true methods such as using manure. Septic waste was pumped in from cities, and while initially it showed promise, the numerous chemicals and contamination in the waste proved too toxic to the plants, causing entire fields to die out. Eventually, a method was developed to separate the human waste from the chemicals, but even then, it was extremely costly. By 2010, fertilizers were considered too costly to produce, with every country (except for Canada, the USSR, and New Zealand) switching to manure-based crop fertilization. 


Hospital in Leeds, UK. Photographed 2013

Medical technology and the production of pharmaceuticals also dramatically declined after the Shock. Disposable medicines went extinct by 1993, and many medicines such as painkillers, anesthesia and antibiotics became very costly to produce, leading to alcohol to be the most popular way of dulling pain. The decline in antibiotics also contributed to the spread of many diseases around the world. By 2005, many pharmaceutical companies had shut down, with the functional ones falling under the umbrella of Bethesda PharmTech Inc. The Sweeney Administration was noted for shifting resources away from medical and pharmaceutical production into agricultural and industrial production. Medical supplies also heavily relied on plastics, so things such as IV tubes, syringes and other tools became harder and harder to produce, which forced the medical industry to recycle them. This led to sterilizing agents to be used up faster and faster, with alcohol replacing it. It was speculated that at least three outbreaks of Hepatitis C in 1997 alone resulted from the use of improperly sanitized IV drips.  

As a combination of reduced energy supplies, the difficulty of replacing parts, and electrical malfunctions, freezers across the world became more and more costly to keep running. Organ transplant and blood transfusions became almost impossible to perform, unless the donors were local, ready and willing. The lack of reliable refrigeration also heavily affected the food supply, as places like supermarkets and warehouses rotted during brownouts. People eating improperly refrigerated food caused gastrointestinal diseases to skyrocket and yet more medical resources to be used. Across the world, refrigerators became centralized and standardized, with working refrigerators seized by the government in Europe, North America and Asia. Many countries, by 2000, had opted to use mainly non-perishible rations made out of their staple food, like Ration Beta in the USA, Ful-Tec Natural in the EF, and the ubiquitous tortillas made all across Latin America. 

Like medical supplies, food became harder and harder to package, as disposable plastic-based containers and wrappers quickly became impractical. Paper bags instead became the most common way of transporting food and medicine, with glass bottles for liquids and some food occasionally being stored in metal cans, though metal was usually prioritized for industrial repairs and military equipment. 

Most furniture also saw a massive decrease in production, with wood being prioritized for burning, and textiles being prioritized for clothing rather than cushions. Some plastic furniture was melted down in the mid 1990s in an attempt to recycle them, but nothing came of it other than extremely toxic fumes. Many apartments became austere and barren, with most people across the world simply having a bed frame, a table, one or two dressers, and two to three dirty, rickety chairs. A large industry sprung up in the USA revolving around repairing and maintaining furniture made before the Glorious Decades, and unlike the clothing industry, this one was never monopolized and thus never died out. For the extremely wealthy, it became common for people to use furniture exclusively made out of glass that was dyed in random colors - glass was much easier to produce than wood and metal. However, things such as chairs quickly fell out of favor as they tended to shatter rather violently. In China, furniture was usually made with metal, or with wicker if you were a high-ranking member of the CCP. The USSR adopted several Kazakh customs, such as sitting on the ground instead of a chair when eating, to reduce the amount of furniture produced so that wood and metal could be focused on things like buildings and weapons. 

The electronics industry was almost wiped out by the Shock. Disposable electronics became almost impossible to manufacture, as almost no country had enough oil to spare for the plastics or enough metal to make the circuitry. Most computer technology regressed, landing at a roughly 1940s-era level by 2027. Computers were big and bulky, filled with exposed wires, circuitry, and prone to overheating and exploding. CRT screens became prohibitively expensive, with a general switch to colored buttons. In the 2020s, many countries began sifting through landfills and junkyards for valuable bits of electronics from the Glorious Decades, mainly containing traces of silver, copper, gold and aluminium. By the Solar Flare, many countries had considered advanced electronic devices to be wastes of energy and resources, and as such, many electronic devices were kept as primitive (and practical) as possible, consisting of glorified on/off switches as opposed to computers. Most of the elites in the Big Four, Patagonia, Australia and New Zealand, and Japan had access to Glorious-Decades level technology, complete with LCD screens, neon tubes and hard disk drives. 

The lack of synthetic rubber also strangled the life out of many industries. Hoses, gaskets, tubes and insulators all became impractical to produce, let alone tires. A vast majority of industrial accidents between 1988-2027 are believed to have been caused by improperly maintained rubber components. In places like China and the USA, there was a drive to switch to pure metal-based tubes but that had various degrees of success and failure. The rubber components in machines made them particularly vulnerable to sabotage, a trait that the AVA and Pilgrims exploited heavily. 

So, how did the world deal with this massive drop in fossil fuels? Well, for the most part, they had to use more fossil fuels. Energy grids shifted from being oil-based to coal and natural gas based. Most supplies of oil ran out around 2005, though a few places in Australia and Canada had left over reserves all the way into 2027. Some countries used more natural gas than coal, but around 2015, most accessible deposits of natural gas had been exhausted. It was known that this would happen for some time now, and all the way back in the early 1990s, countries had began experimenting with various ways to bridge the gap and replace their pollution-spewing coal-based infrastructure. 


The Banfora Solar Farm, Greater Senegal. Taken on June 29th, 965 ASJ

A lot of the alternative energies used today, in the 30th century, were developed in Australia and New Zealand and Japan. The “Green Quartet” (nuclear, solar, wind and hydroelectric power) had their origins in those two countries, but were not able to be produced on a large scale until the Xhosan Solar Renaissance of 435 ASJ (2462 AD). 

Japan, long reliant on imports of coal and oil, saw their infrastructure rapidly decay over the course of the 1990s. An initiative to switch from personal automobiles to public transportation helped things, and energy was rationed so strictly that entire apartment blocks became bathed in darkness for days at a time. Before the Emperor’s suicide in 2006, and the “Great Departing”, the keenest minds in Japan had come together to make the most of their extremely limited resources and develop alternate ways of fueling Japan’s vehicles, infrastructure and supply lines. Of these, hydroelectricity and nuclear were for the most part, already in use - Japan had a few nuclear power plants that had been safely shut down in 1980, and all of them were up and running again by the year 2000. Japan had only 12 nuclear power plants before the TMI incident, and while they did not shut them down, they were deliberately kept on levels to safely minimize their output. The Japanese Nuclear Safety Commission heavily regulated the gradual ramping up of the reactors, but demand seemed to only increase despite the austerity measures in place by the government. In 2003, rolling blackouts caused a few of the overwhelmed and understaffed plants to be evacuated out of fears that they could explode similar to TMI. The first major nuclear plant after 1988 was built in 2004, outside of Tokyo. 

As a result of the aftermath of the 2003 heat waves, Japan’s Minister of Energy commissioned research into geothermal energy sources. Japan had actually dabbled with geothermal power stations all the way back in the 1920s, and so several prototype stations were designed. They were built in isolated rural zones (as rural as one could get in Japan), and away from population centers, and used active volcanos to heat water and used the steam to turn turbines, thus generating electricity. Ocean water was used, and the first major prototype geothermal power plant, located in Yanaizu-Nishiyama, was opened in 2005 and was capable of outputting 75 MWe. 

Geothermal was costly to create for how little energy they produced, and Japan was very careful to expand their nuclear power, as their supplies of uranium were extremely limited, though Japan was in the process of filtering radioactive particles from sea water, mixing it with filler, and creating “dirty rods” for reactors. Solar power was also considered, however the skies of Japan were far too cloudy for it to be practical. 

Hydroelectricity remained a large producer of electricity, with the Minister of Energy working with the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries to implement hydroelectric dams into the irrigation systems of Japan. In 2004, plans were drafted up to create a major hydroelectric dam outside of Tokyo to power a series of desalination plants, but construction did not start before the suicides. 

Almost all of Japan’s research was lost in the “Great Departing”, as numerous scientists, disillusioned with life, leaped off of buildings. Many nuclear power plants almost went critical, as depressed workers simply didn't show up to work. Japan’s Minister of Energy, Takumi Aoyama, struggled to form a cohesive work force with the will to live to keep the country functioning. He would end up founding the Steward Society. 

It would take a full 11 years later for Japan to rebuild itself enough to once again focus on expanding its power sources. By this time, in 2017, Japan’s energy infrastructure had been entirely dedicated to desalination and food processing, with the last of Japan’s coal, oil and natural gas used up. It was here that Japan made contact with the Union of Australia and New Zealand, and began to import not just uranium, concrete, and other materials for nuclear power plants, but experimental thin-film solar cells as well. Solar batteries were first prototyped by New Zealand in 1990, while they were advanced and upgraded by Australia in the late 2000s. It wasn’t until ANZ exchanged technology with Japan that the solar cell was finally perfected. 

Dr. Martin Kea Rutherford is credited as developing the thin-film photovoltaic solar cell, for the New Zealand Minister for Energy. The cells were initially time-consuming to produce, with the first factory producing them once every 34 hours. It was after exchanging technology with Australia that the process was significantly sped up, with efficiency peaking at just 86 minutes per cell in 2007. Australia later developed bifacial cells, allowing both sides of the panel to receive power, though this increased production time to 2 hours 42 minutes. Australia, with its vast, open deserts, proved to be the more efficient country to build solar farms in, and factories across Australia’s east coast churned out panel after panel until they ran out of silicon in 2025. 

When the Steward Society got ahold of the first shipment of ANZ solar cells, the Prefect for Technological Development created a program at the First National Academy for Technological Education devoted entirely to increasing the efficiency of the solar cells. While a lot of the smog had cleared from the skies of Japan, it was still overcast more often than not, and the production output of the solar cells was severely limited (as they had been designed to be used in crystal-clear skies above the Australian Outback). It was in 2020 that Japan was finally successful in their endeavor, as scientists at the FNATE developed the first multi-junction solar cell, allowing it to receive power from different wavelengths of light, significantly increasing the overall effectiveness of the cell, and allowing (albeit minimal) electrical collection during cloudy, overcast days and during dawn and dusk. 

These solar cells then spread all throughout Japan and the Union of Australia and New Zealand. Japan’s decaying public transportation system (just a series of trains in the largest 4 cities in the country) became entirely solar powered, though the trains were finally shut down in 2024 as the solar panels literally melted in the heat. 


Offshore Wind Farm located off the coast of Auckland, Old Zealand. Photo taken around 341 ASJ.

Another technology perfected by ANZ and Japan was wind power. Wind turbines were built along New Zealand's coast in the 1990s, but technology remained primitive and inefficient until the early 2020s. By the 2020s, New Zealand was powered by armies of solar panels, wind farms and even a few geothermal substations, in addition to a hydroelectric integrated irrigation system. The scientists in the Steward Society, upon seeing the schematic, proposed a number of changes that dramatically increased the stability of the structures, allowing for larger offshore turbines to be built. 

Australia and New Zealand and Japan were exceptions though - much of the world continued to limp along on oil, then natural gas, then coal, becoming dirtier every year. In places like Africa, Latin America, and the former middle east, many simply burned whatever was on hand to create steam to power ancient, Victorian-era machinery like boilers and steam engines. A few countries in these regions, such as Brazil and Mexico, experimented in hydroelectricity and solar power, respectively, but these projects never left the prototyping stage due to the political instability plaguing their nations. 

Nuclear power plants were built across many countries, however these “dirty reactors” were, for the most part, a rushed construction more focused on supplying power than the safety of the workers inside them or those living nearby. The only countries that managed to perfect nuclear energy were the USSR and Australia, with the USSR (after many, many attempts) developing nuclear powered train engines by 2010, though they were incredibly crude and bulky. These advanced nuclear power plants eventually migrated to the Nordic Union, Poland, and East Germany, though they remained large and bulky, incapable of outputting a fraction of the MWe that a Soviet, Australian or Patagonian reactor. Recently uncovered evidence found during the Sinai Expedition of 817 ASJ has pointed to the ancient nation of Israel as extensively utilizing nuclear power for their Kibbutz bunkers. Israel’s nuclear power plants were in the middle - they weren’t as advanced as those in Europe or Patagonia, but they weren’t as crude as the experimental ones built in North America and Australia. Of the 100+ Israeli bunkers discovered, more than half of them have become saturated with radiation, now pristine portals into the past much like the ancient ruins of Pompeii once were. 

In many cases, once a country had run out of oil, they switched to coal. Ironically, in the countries most vulnerable to this (mainly in Africa) their transportation and infrastructure weren't entirely reliant on petroleum and oil, so their supply lines remained relatively intact, but severe famines and resource shortages devastated entire economies. A few ancient African electrical infrastructures remain intact, if non-functional, giving archaeologists a look into the engineering of the past. 


The Hoof-Er Dam, completed sometime before the Black Ages (many historians agree around 1936). Destroyed in 254 ASJ in a battle between the New Cascadian Republic and the Legion of Canaan. 

Hydropower was a double edged sword in many cases - dams could provide ludicrous amounts of energy, with the ancient Guri Dam (completed in 1978) in what was once Venezuela producing over 10,000 MWe. However, chronic drought cycles and irrigation demands usually forced hydroelectric dams to be decommissioned. Other times, governments believed that the energy supplied from them outweighed the fact that a few thousand people would starve to death. Ancient China is known for building a vast majority of such dams, including the Three Gorges and Ertan Dams, during the early 2000s. This caused already strained water supplies to be diverted from their normal water cycle, and is thought to be one of the contributors to the mass die-off of vegetation in mainland China in the Black Ages. 

The European Federation was also known for over-utilizing hydroelectric dams in the 1990s, leading to mass famines and drought cycles to persist well into the 22nd century. A majority of their dams were also built in the now flooded region known as the “Low Countries”, leading to 90% of their hydroelectric power stations to be underwater by the 2020s. The European Federation was initially a leader in alternate energies in the immediate aftermath of the Shock, as numerous prototype solar farms, wind farms, hydroelectric dams and nuclear power plants were built along the former regions of Iberia, France, and Italy. The European people were quite rowdy though, used to the instant gratification of the Glorious Decades, and did not take the policy of austerity well. Far-left and Far-right terrorism hampered the development of many solar farms, and a nuclear accident outside of Brussels in 2011 led to all of their nuclear power plants to be decommissioned. Like the UK, the coal miners and their unions forced many governments to stay on the path of fossil fuels, with coal becoming the dominant source of power in the EF and UK by 2015. 

The only exception to this was the state of Denmark (now part of the Kingdom of Norway), as their wind and hydroelectric farms were not only efficient, but were able to be used on ocean water instead of freshwater rivers usually reserved for irrigation. Because of this, wind and hydroelectric power were allowed to thrive and evolve over time, with the UK, Ireland, and Nordic Union all receiving prototype plants during their occupations by Brussels. In the 2010s, these technologies were replicated around Europe, and now the Irish Isles are powered by vast, off-shore wind farms. The Nordic Union leaned a bit more towards nuclear power though, however it was merely a shield to develop nuclear weapons that they could use to deter the Lion of Brussels and the Bear of Moscow from invading them again. 

East Germany (now the Holy Empire of Europa) managed to integrate tiny hydroelectric dams into their irrigation canals and vertical step farms, much like how Japan and ANZ integrated into their farms and cities, though East Germany’s were far less efficient and generated only a fraction of their Pacific counterparts. Still, East Germany is notable as the only country in Europe to notably integrate hydroelectric power into their energy grid and not result in major droughts due to the mismanagement of rivers and lakes. 

Poland on the other hand, much like its history in the Black Ages, was a mixed bag. They used a little bit of everything. Mining unions kept coal in circulation, while small-scale hydroelectric dams caused drought, but not enough to be a concern to Kowalski. Stolen nuclear research from the Soviets allowed for some limited production, and a few wind farms were built in fields too polluted to grow crops in. 

The United States ended up being hit the hardest when it came to trying to dig their way out of reliance on fossil fuels. Hydroelectric dams in the Southwest contributed to the rapidly expanding desert, while geothermal power proved to be too inefficient to supply America’s gargantuan energy needs. The skies above America remained eternally smoggy, so solar was out of the question. Corn-based ethanol was prototyped in the early 2000s, but the Smith Administration deemed it more important to use that corn to feed the growing number of starving unemployed. Some nuclear power plants were recommissioned in the northwest (now the Cascadian Confederacy in the present day), and a few dams were built along the Great Lakes, but America greedily gobbled up coal like their livelihood depended upon it - which, for the most part, it did. 


Nuclear power plant located in New Tokyo (formerly Yelizovo), Japan

In the present day, fossil fuels are very, very rarely used, mainly only a novelty or by researchers studying pre-Great Death technology. Boiling polluted water for environmental purification is a large source of energy in the reconstruction and geoengineering programs in Africa and Latin America. Research into heat-resistant solar farms are being conducted, with a Xhosan company hoping to turn the entire Middle East into a massive solar farm by the end of the 30th Century. 

Appendix: The Last Comforts, Part 1

From “The Restaurant at the End of the World”, by Tali Iqaluppik-Larocque, Tu Nedhé University Press. 3rd edition, printed 970 ASJ 

https://youtu.be/I5banQi2LuM?si=dzKNLYqM4M6bLQoi 
Introduction 

For many of us, food and cuisine is a glue that keeps our lives, our families, our cultures and sometimes even our nations together. What we eat, how we eat it, and whom with, speaks volumes about a society’s values and rituals. This has been the way since time immemorial. The mythic Romans had Saturnalia, which emphasized over-indulgence through a feast of nuts, cheese and pork. A thousand years ago, as late as the mid Black Ages, the ancient Americans had Thanksgiving, in which a huge turkey was to be roasted up and eaten, savagely. And yet, this savagery united those in the ancient American states, with the President even pardoning his meal. As of today, many societies around the world hold meals to be a sacred part of life. Food not only nourishes us and allows us to live another day, but it also is a time for us to come together with those close to us and share the highlights of the day, their joys, their sorrows. To eat alone is to be selfish, to not share these life-giving gifts with loved ones. From the oppressive Reformed Empire of American Alaska to the egalitarian United Antarctican States, from the poorest vagrant to the richest solar lord, eating is one of the many things that unites us as humans, just like drinking, breathing, and dying. 

During the Black Ages, after the Crash of ‘88 and The Shock, those around the dying world clung desperately to the last comforts in their lives, now empty of purpose and entertainment. But over time, governments tried harder and harder to feed their people or risked dying themselves in a violent revolution. Nourishing meals dwindled and dwindled, until it was said that “there was nothing to drink but the salt of the sea and nothing to eat but the lead of the bullets fired at you”. The darkest years in human history can be traced to these years, where after decades of reckless overindulgence, it finally came crashing down, and humanity began to eat itself to ward off starvation. 

Was it worth it? I’ll let you decide. 
Food, Inc’s E-Z Steak Dinner
Produced: 1990-2004, -2065 (alleged) 
Weight: 124g 
Calories: 298 (3g protein) 

Before Food, Inc, dominated the food industry (and later the government) of the United States, in their early days they tried to invoke nostalgia for the Glorious Decades with this staple meal of the 1990s. Made in the style of TV Dinners popular in the 1960s-1980s, the product consisted of four components. 

First was a tiny 25 gram vegan steak, made with soy beans, corn, mushrooms, and wheat. The steak supposedly was meant to imitate the texture and taste of beef steaks, though most of the public disagreed with this. The steak, while being considered tasty and relatively nutritious, was described as rubbery and stringy. Served alongside the steak was a serving of roughly 98 grams of mashed potatoes and green beans. The mashed potatoes were usually creamy, but rather bland, and reminded many of the texture and feel of ice cream (a popular sweet food during the late Golden Age and early Black Ages). The green beans were described as losing their color as the years dragged on, with them being “barely green” by 1997. Lastly, the final part of the product was a tiny dollop of a dark brown, syrupy sauce. Flavored with thin flakes of peppers and spices, the sauce was usually sauteed with the steak or drizzled over the mashed potatoes. 

The product remained extensively popular throughout the Red Decades, with the poor and unemployed being given government-subsidized shipments of the product from the Universal Food Ration. Many chose to eat the steak with a side of government cheese and other dairy products in the early half of the Red Decades, before the Great American Dustbowl began to form. Initially, in the immediate aftermath of the Shock, some families ran into issues trying to keep the product properly refrigerated until consumption. During the National Refrigeration Consolidation Plan of 1996, when the American government started to centralize working refrigerators to maximize food preservation, many families started the practice of immediately cooking the product upon receiving it. After finishing the meal, it was common practice in the 1990s to dip the tray into a pot of boiling water and mix it with flour and other grains to make a gruel that sometimes, vaguely, tasted like the E-Z steak. 

After the start of the Second Civil War and the Great American Famine of 2000-2005, Food, Inc, had decided that the E-Z Steak was no longer worth making. A vast majority of their ingredients were grown in the now war-torn Deep South, and keeping the product refrigerated long enough to make it to distributors was becoming increasingly difficult. This caused a shift towards making food products non-perishable, long lasting, and as efficient as possible.
Food, Inc’s Ration Alpha
Produced: 2003-2026, -2098 (alleged)
Weight: 450g (earliest record) - 100g (latest record)
Calories: 800 calories - 250 calories, 3 g - <1 g protein

At first, Ration Alpha was a veritable feast of nutrition. Designed with efficiency, nutrition, and shelf-life in mind, the first versions of Ration Alpha boasted an even greater calorie count than the E-Z steak. This of course came at the cost of taste and texture. The earliest ones, made during the Smith Administration, were a chunky loaf of 11 vegetables and grains, some of which are now extinct. Wheat flour was used as the base, and bits of corn, rice, beets, potatoes, and salt and garlic for taste. 

As time went on though, various plants were deliberately not grown due the poor ratio of calories to growing space (and thus lower profits). Ingredient after ingredient was cut, until it was a small, thin bun of wheat, corn and potatoes, with a sprinkle of sea salt for flavor. In 2013, it was decided that this was still not efficient enough, and the gruel was baked into a cracker rather than a loaf. This allowed for more of it to be stored at once, and was also easier for measuring rations. Before water rationing was widespread, many housewives would grind up these rations and use them to bake a sort of mushy pseudo-bread, by mixing it with water and leaving it out to dry on a reflective metal surface during a heat wave. 

Ration Alpha remained the most nutritious government-issued ration in the United States for quite some time, although, for a brief stint in 2015-2016, this was not the case. Ration Alpha was eventually made only for government officials and collaborators in the 2020s, as important vegetable samples were shipped off to Alaska and Hawai’i. 
Food, Inc’s Ration Beta
Produced: 2004-2022, -2065 (Alleged)
Weight: 300g (earliest record) - 50g (latest record)
Calories: 740 calories - 110 calories, 5 g - <1 g protein 

Ration Beta was born out of the trend of recycling E-Z steak trays to make a sort of soup. The product, being a block of dried vegetables held together by wheat, could be eaten raw, but it was intended to be dropped in a pot of boiling water and stirred into a (sometimes) flavorful soup. In the early days, many types of vegetables were used to add flavor, like carrots, beans, peas, onions, tomatoes, and garlic. By the 2010s, though, it had been reduced to just faded, withered tomatoes and beets. 

In the 2020s, due to the widespread water rationing, Ration Beta was completely discontinued as it was viewed as too inefficient for the chronic droughts facing the world. Flavor was no longer a concern, as the very rich could get their own properly seasoned and flavorful foods, and to many in the streets, they had long forgotten the taste of anything other than salt, smoke, and sadness. 
Food, Inc’s Ration Gamma
Produced: 2008-2014, -2100 (Alleged)
Weight: 150g
Calories: 890 calories, 13-19g protein (true number unknown)

Gamma was created out of brutal efficiency and widespread loss of arable land. Reports of protein deficiency had become widespread, and government rations of peanut butter were running dry. Peanuts went extinct in the USA in 2015, actually - one of the first casualties of the Great Heat Wave. Labor was the one resource the USA wasn’t running out of any time soon, but still, workers needed to eat, and they needed to eat protein to remain efficient workers. Employers couldn’t just fire them: if everyone was living off government handouts by this point, then it wouldn’t matter what city the workers came from - Seattle to New York, everyone was running out of protein. Meat and dairy could not feasibly feed the entire population, let alone a single state, so the scientists in the recently emancipated Food, Inc (which was made state owned from 1995-2007) began to wonder how to fill the protein deficit. 

CEO and future President of the United States, Richard Shelby Holden, proposed an ingenious, if desperate measure to feed the protein requirements of the nation. Vegetable protein was a bit too slow to grow, and many crops did not do well in the increasing aridity. Instead, he proposed, using more exotic sources of nutrition - such as jellyfish blooms, junk fish, crickets, and cockroaches. This allowed more nutritious fish to be saved for the elites, for those who could actually buy them, and the poor could eat whatever sources of protein they could get. It’s not like they could tell the difference between what an insect tasted like and a prime rib steak. (well, maybe they could, but everyone was too hungry to complain). 

Food, Inc bankrolled the “Great Pest Exterminations” of 2008-2011, and insects eating crops were considered a boon instead of a curse. They were free protein, after all. Worms, slugs, ants, flies and crickets were all collected from the baking farms. In the north, outside of major industrial districts like Chicago, the Twin Cities, and Detroit, old warehouses were converted into fly farms, using trash and human waste as a culture. Residents were told it was a recycling center, which it technically was, but for those who worked there, their silence was bought with Ration Alpha. For those who tried to speak, they vanished into the night, and all of their testimonies were conveniently discredited. 

Jellyfish blooms were a bit more tricky to get back to the states intact, but made for a great filler. Products with blooms ended up having a sort of spongey, rubbery feel to them, and helped mask the chitinous, crunchy texture of ground up bugs. 

Of course, using human waste to grow swarms of flies and grinding up radioactive cockroaches caused some health issues. Reports of infertility began to rise, and some people even lost hair. This was all swept underneath the rug though, and with suicide being legalized nationwide, that problem eventually took care of itself. 
Food, Inc’s Ration Delta
Produced: 2014-2016
Weight: 100g
Calories: 460 calories, 2g - <1g protein 

Using insects for protein was running into problems, as this new livestock was quickly causing diseases to spread. It was also using way too much arable (ish) land for how little it produced. Jellyfish were going extinct, with the last batch of them being brought in before the end of 2013. Something had to be done, and quick. 

The cities had been picked clean of insects, rats, and other animals. The only plants that could grow in places outside Michigan and Alaska were extremely scrawny stalks of corn, withered tomatoes, shriveled lettuce, tiny potatoes, and diseased wheat. The country was running out of options. No matter how efficiently the land was farmed, no matter how thinly the ration was cut down, there still wasn’t enough food to feed the country. 

The government once again turned to unorthodox sources of nutrition. Mold was scraped from pipes, cacti were ripped from the ground and shredded into a stringy, spiny paste, and boats began to sift algae and krill from the gray oceans. Seaweed was also collected and used as a filler. 

Every single one of these sources ended up being not only unprofitable, but grossly inefficient for the amount of protein they produced. Mold could not be grown fast enough to be farmed, cacti only grew in the lethally hot southwest, and the algae, while relatively nutritious, was extremely expensive to collect, requiring advanced nets that were nearly impossible to make in the energy-strapped economy. 

Ration Delta was made in an extremely limited number. Estimates range between 1-4 million units of the ration were produced. The product, consisting of a thin, bubbly cracker pocked with green and gray spots, was notoriously hated for the bland, crunchy taste and the weird smell the product gave off. 
Food, Inc’s Ration Omega
Produced: 2014-2027
Weight: 400-100g (reports are inconsistent) 
Calories: [REDACTED]

Omega, given the jump in letters in the Greek Alphabet, was meant to be an absolute last resort, for the poorest of the poor without any hope for something better. Originally stemming from the idea of using human corpses as fertilizer, the heartless elites in the highest echelons of corporate and government society decided to skip the fertilizer bit, and just use human bodies. Not only was it practical, it was extremely cost effective. 

Only the highest ranked members of the US Government and the Food, Inc Board were told of the true nature of the frequently advertised, yet mysteriously absent, “Plutus Fertiziler”. The public was told that wondrous breakthroughs in fertilizers, crop rotation and farming practices had created a massive surplus of crops, and that protein deficiencies were a thing of the past. 

Very few made the connection between the rise of Ration Omega in parallel to the numerous disappearances that began to plague the cities of America. Criminals were never seen again, vanishing into the vast penal farms, never to be seen again. And no one made the realization that those in power never, ever got Ration Omega - it was always the poorest of the poor who were given the ration. It’s also a good thing that farms and ration factories became entirely staffed by convicts, as well - after they had “served their sentence” they were usually released… into a meat grinder. 

It was, in the end, a stop gap measure. Human civilization was on the brink of collapse. The War on Cold had been won, and the heat was rising. Everyone - from the most dignified ambassadors to the lowliest of hobos - was living on borrowed time. It was not a question of if, but when, everything came crashing down. And Ration Omega bought the government time. In those hopeful years of 2014 and 2015, they still believed they could turn things around and a magical miracle food was just around the corner. But it was quickly realized that if America was to survive, many must be left behind. 

So, the main source of protein was human flesh: the most expedient, cost-effective ingredient in the ration. What else was in it? Basically anything that was even vaguely edible. Weeds, moss, fungus, cacti, and even tree bark. If it was organic, it was thrown in with the greenish slop. Kudzu vine was the most prominent of these, being the only plant that reliably grew in the ever-expanding dust bowl. And after the lands were stripped clean of all vegetation, the lands turned to dust. By 2017, cities had been scraped clean of moss, rats were considered extinct, and bugs were a now mythical pest. 

As it turns out, recycling the dead for food over and over again is not sustainable at all. By the mid 2020s, severe protein deficiencies and even reports of prion diseases began to show the government just how bad things had gotten. People weren’t dying fast enough, and those that would become Ration Omega had been eating a diet of nothing but recycled humans for years. It was estimated that by 2028, the process would become so inefficient that it would take more calories digesting the ration than it would give the person who consumed it. 

It is unknown what the government had planned if the United States had lasted that long. 
FulTec Unity Bar
Produced: 2004-2026
Weight: 150g - 120g
Calories: 600 calories - 350 calories, 22g - 19g protein

It was the aftermath of the Red Summer and the Crackdown. Agriculture, devastated by the insane summer heat, riots and the general strike, had taken a severe blow and was only slowly recovering. The staple meals that Europeans had lived off of throughout the 90s and early 00s were no longer sustainable to create; there was simply not enough agriculture for it. The Federation delegated FulTec the task of feeding the majority of the European people, their first product was devised with cooperation from the European Federation, a “wonder ration” specially made to unite the divided states and hostile people of the Federation together and hopefully keep them from rioting in the streets.

With the repeal of anti-monopoly and anti-corporate laws in the late 90s by the federal government, FulTec had grown immensely in power and dominated over the other, more localised foodstuffs companies established across the Federation. Following the Red Summer, FulTec had become the Federation’s sole private food supplier, and they were intimately linked with the European government, helped by them contributing their resources to stop the general strike of 2003. “Natural” food was still available in the winter but in the summer FulTec was dominant, and as the summers became longer and winters warmer they became even more dominant, leading to them becoming the Federation’s single food supplier by 2010.

The Unity Bar was a granola bar, meant to be synthesis of every country in the Federation and condensed into a tiny block that would ideally outlast any heatwave. Early iterations of the bar actually lived up to its name, and the extra workers required to harvest the ingredients did actually create a few million jobs. 

What the government did not disclose was the extremely high mortality rate on those farms. 

The very first iteration of the Unity Bar, like Siliao, was actually quite healthy and nutritious for its size. It was considered wasteful to (attempt to) create the vast variety of products produced in the Glorious Decades, so instead, Europe’s agricultural resources were consolidated into a clean, tightly packed ration. It also used ingredients from each of the ten constituent countries (despite the centralisation), further fostering an idea of European Unity. Each of the ten nations contributed one major ingredient in the first version of Unity, which was then shipped to various FulTec plants across the country. Here is what was sourced from each country. 

Italy: Durum wheat
Spain: Dates (dried and pulped)
Portugal: Figs (dried and pulped) 
France: Apples (dried and pulped) 
West Germany: Plums (dried and pulped) 
Belgium: Pears (dried and pulped) 
Netherlands: Barley wheat
Denmark: Rapeseed oil
Austria: Soybean butter
Luxembourg: Grape raisins

The ingredients were mashed together to create a sort of trail mix, and then held together with wheat flour. According to advertisements, the bars were soaked in the juices of the drained fruits, but evidence of this has never been found. 

What the technicians did not take into account was the ever-expanding dustbowl and desertification in Italy and Iberia. Many fruits became unable to be grown in large enough amounts, and durum wheat had the strange habit of catching on fire. The flooding of the Netherlands and saltwater inundation in Denmark caused vast fields of barley and rapeseed to become barren and no longer capable of producing crops due to the soil pollution.

The recipe was changed, and while it remained relatively nutritious, it was far less flavorful. The farms of France, Belgium, Austria and Germany became overworked and crowded, growing the majority of the oats, wheat, barley, and soybeans in the Federation. Grape production focused solely on creating wines, as the alcohol was needed “for medical purposes”. Plums and apples were still used and produced for the ration, though in increasingly small numbers. By 2021, it was estimated that every Unity bar produced only contained less than 1 gram of combined fruits. 

While it started as a cheap, low-cost ration for the poorest, it eventually became the premium ration for government officials, soldiers, and high-level collaborators in federation satellite states, like Ireland, the UK, and the Nordic Union. And yet, even this shallow, calorie-dense granola bar was still far better than FulTec’s later products.
FulTec Marine
Produced: 2007-2012
Weight: 110g - 80g
Calories: 400 calories - 270 calories, 28g - 6g protein

Despite the success of the Unity Bar and decent performance of their other products, FulTec still struggled throughout the remainder of the 2000s, driven by the colossal natural disasters that occurred such as the flooding of the Netherlands and abandonment of Iberia and Sicily. They were only kept afloat by government support, and the Board of Executives looked around the world for inspiration. In the late 2000s, giant American boats swept across the Northern Atlantic, drawing massive hauls of ‘something’. But that ‘something’ could not be fish, as hardly any remained in the oceans. After some research and consultation with scientists, FulTec came to the conclusion that they could only be jellyfish, and found an idea for a new product, FulTec Marine.

The product would mix mainly crushed jellyfish bloom alongside some nuts, fruit and insects to create a bar smaller than Unity but one easier to mass-produce and feed the poor with. It would have a very rubbery and gelatinous texture, which testers described as “off-putting”, but it was put on the market in late 2007 anyway.

Surprisingly to the company, the product was initially a large success, with people preferring its new texture to the tough, stale one of their other products. It quickly grew in the market and fed a plurality of the populace from 2007-09. However, FulTec had made a large miscalculation, believing the jellyfish blooms were larger than they were and that they would be the main ingredient of FulTec’s Ration Gamma, despite their intelligence in Food, Inc. suggesting the opposite. Jellyfish blooms near European waters soon began collapsing at calamitous rates, and the answer became obvious to all of FulTec.

By 2009 the ration became far too costly to make, and it’s presence on the market dropped in proportion. It could not afford to be reduced in size; it was already small enough, and so it was simply withdrawn from the market over time, creating a large dent in FulTec’s ailing finances. It was taken off the market fully in 2012, as the last jellyfish blooms were collected by Europe, America following a year later.
FulTec Natural
Produced: 2009-2021
Weight: 120g - 90g
Calories: 450 calories - 290 calories, 39g - 11g protein

Soybeans, the main protein of the Unity Bar, became increasingly harder to grow in large enough numbers. Heatwaves and drought had caused the remaining crops to become smaller and more sickly every year. In 2009, just five years after the Unity Bar’s debut, it was deemed no longer a priority to grow soybeans - instead, an alternative source of protein was to be found. 

Corporate espionage and spies embedded in the United States had uncovered the American government’s plans for using ground up insects as the new protein source for their rations. FulTec, dissatisfied with the increasing production costs of soy, decided to explore other, more similar avenues. Locusts and mealworms, common pests of the dying French farms, became sought-after sources of protein. Workers were told they were disposing of them, but a few workers caught on. They were never seen again. 

The seas around Europe had long since stopped producing fish in any meaningful number, and instead, boats were sent to canvas the coasts of the Federation for plants such as duckweed, seaweed, and other materials. Lastly, the few swamps and wetlands of Germany, France, and Denmark were combed for collections of muck and algae. Again, workers were simply told that they were clearing the way for more farmland or harvesting water for irrigation, not that they were actually collecting the ingredients for Europe's next meal. 

FulTec Natural was produced to look exactly like the grain-heavy Unity bar on the outside. In reality, it only used a minimal amount of oats, grains and barley. Inside of it was the main course: a thick, nougat-like filling made of powdered bugs, dehydrated duckweed, and a thin, runny paste derived from algae. Small amounts of salt were added to mask the taste of the algae.

The product, according to reports, felt “distinctively un-natural” in the mouth, and did not taste particularly pleasant, the salt mixing poorly with the other products creating a nasty flavour, however it was good enough that Europeans did not actively avoid the ration (unlike some others). Natural was cheaper to produce than most of FulTec’s other products and had significantly enhanced nutritional benefits, making it an instant hit among the people and FulTec’s executives, many believing it was the “wonder ration” they had for so long been trying to achieve. By 2010 it was being mass-produced and became by far FulTec’s dominant product. 74% of FulTec’s sales in May 2013 were Natural. Other products such as Marine and the Unity Bar were pushed out of the market. For a time, some thought FulTec had solved the hunger crisis.

However, with the endlessly rising temperatures, Natural was never going to be sustainable. Production remained shaky at best, even at its peak, and duckweed, seaweed, and insects were all gathered in amounts that were never consistent. Signs of decline in its production were being observed before, but the Great Heatwave of 2015 dealt a killing blow to the product, with repeated mass deaths of insects and disappearances of duckweed and seaweed being common. The product quickly became incredibly costly to create, and drastic measures were being made to cut their costs and avoid fully transitioning to their last resort. In 2015, crickets were replaced with fly larvae, and in 2017, ocean materials stopped being collected. Algae remained the only option that was (marginally) viable, but that required water, a resource in increasingly short supply. In 2021, it was decided that even that was no longer worth the production cost, and FulTec Natural was permanently shelved, to be replaced with something vastly worse and inhumane in its stead.
FulTec Plenty
Produced: 2013-2027
Weight: 200g - 180g
Calories: [REDACTED] 

By the early 2010s, FulTec’s executives knew that the nation and the world was doomed; after all, it was what their climate data showed. Natural would not last, none of their products would, what little existed to create “food” was rapidly disappearing. They were running out of options, and turned to increasingly desperate ideas to feed the population of Europe in the long-term and buy themselves some time to escape before the starving populace turned on them and killed them all.

The idea of using people as food was first proposed sometime in the late 2000s as a joke, a last, last, unthinkable resort for if shit really hit the fan. The idea was aptly titled “Project Unthinkable” and shelved until in 2012 FulTec revisited it and began to take the plan slightly more seriously. Before long, it was taken completely seriously and plans for “FulTec Plenty” began to be devised. FulTec had finally done the unthinkable, perhaps some years earlier than expected.

FulTec Plenty, much like Ration Omega, was created as a way of minimizing production costs while also reducing the population of “deviant” Europeans, considered basically anyone terminally ill, politically ambitious, violent or simply at the wrong place at the wrong time. Where FulTec diverged from Food, Inc was their inhumane ruthlessness when it came to eliminating their opponents. Before the Great Heatwave, the fact that FulTec Plenty was edible (which is a stretch) was secondary to its primary purpose, which was helping to eliminate opposition to the state. It was prototyped in the UK, where in the summer of 2012 rioters in Brixton were carted off to an industrial waste disposal facility and “disposed of”. Reports of stolen soybeans in the area made one particularly cruel Jerry (many Brits called the occupiers and collaborators Jerry despite many of them being from Belgium) petition to use this "perfectly good protein” to reduce costs. Throughout 2012, protesters and vigilantes unknowingly volunteered to help FulTec test just how far they could recycle a human body. 

Another aspect of the project was “total agricultural denial” in occupied states. Outside of designated, FulTec operated farms, in high-resistance areas (mainly the south of France and lots of Italy) the countryside was combed of all organic natural resources. Larger bushes and trees that weren’t burned by wildfires were sent back to Belgium to be processed into lumber, but much of the remaining vegetation was collected and dumped into a vat, where it was mixed with ground up fungi. In theory, it would make all hostile areas incapable of supporting a populace strong enough to fight back. 

The identity of FulTec Plenty was a closely guarded secret, known only by FulTec’s executives, the workers operating on the process, and the heads of the federal government. FulTec in 2012 presented it to the government as a way of disposing of resistance and opposition, calculating correctly it would be the most likely way to convince them to adopt the product. In 2013 it was introduced to the markets, advertised as a variant of Natural but cheaper and containing more protein. The product sold well, with occasional complaints regarding the taste, but they were less than the many complaints about Natural from testers. After reaching above 1 in 5 of sold foodstuffs, however, the price suddenly spiked; they were running out of people to use. There were only so many criminals and protestors on the streets, after all. Plenty stayed around the 20% mark for a while, being sold as a more expensive but nutritious variant of Natural, until 2015 arrived and the status quo crumbled into dust.

The mass dieoff of almost all of Natural’s ingredients, especially insects, meant that it’s production costs, and therefore its price, spiked suddenly and never returned. Natural had become unsustainable to create, at least in its current form, and the primary nourishment of the vast majority of Europeans had vanished from them over a few weeks. If a replacement was not found, there would almost certainly be an uprising and the end of the Federation.

The price of FulTec Plenty, however, had conveniently stayed the same throughout the Heatwave despite supposedly using the same ingredients as Natural. Being too malnourished and exhausted to critically think about it, people quickly moved onto the product and sales exploded uncontrollably. The government had to expand production quickly, and thus introduced reforms designed to do just that. All prisoners and people convicted of crimes would be killed and sent to processing, and all recorded deaths in general would be processed for Plenty. The price spiked, but Plenty remained affordable for lots of the European populace, and with the help of a few subsidies, it quickly and utterly dominated the foodstuffs market following the Heatwave. People had become the staple food of Europe.

Of course, not everyone was malnourished, and some people had many sources of intelligence from within the Federation’s government. The LPUs ——

— INFORMATION REDACTED —
LEVEL 4 CLEARANCE REQUIRED
FOR FOLLOWING INFORMATION
CHECKING...
CHECKING...
CHECKING...
— CLEARANCE DENIED —

——

Eventually, the supply of corpses from the Heatwave ran out, and Plenty’s price spiked yet again. It had become the only way the government (which by this point had [REDACTED]) was able to reliably feed its people and stop them from rebelling, and so more measures had to be taken. The definition of subversive expanded, but that was still not enough, and the new, sadistic leadership of FulTec, completely disconnected from the person’s daily life, came up with measures designed to keep Plenty existing until “global civilisation collapses”. The measures were devised in 2017 and put into action the following year and would change the society and fabric of Western Europe for centuries to come.

Lots of rural Europe was dead, with everyone aside from the elderly having moved from there to the cities. Most remaining rural towns were near FulTec’s farms and exclusively for workers there. The remaining rural towns were considered a burden on the state by FulTec, and so were promptly wiped off the map beginning 2018. Squads were sent to them to round up and kill all people there, who were processed for Plenty. The towns would be destroyed and materials repurposed for the cities. This form of “rural genocide” was quiet, hardly anyone had connection with these places anymore and whoever knew was silenced. The other major measure involved the movement of internal refugees within the Federation, which had already caused serious instability before. Squads would patrol common routes for the refugees, round groups of them up, and again, shoot them. With their sheer number it would not make a massive dent in their number, but it was still statistically, and far more morally, significant. The measures worked in that they massively increased the number of bodies available for Plenty and brought down its price, and they also worked in transforming the European Federation into a nakedly genocidal terror-state, an organ of totalitarianism that was contrarily also in anarchy in many of its cities, a “state” where law was long-dead and the innocent were prosecuted instead of the guilty. In fact, it could no longer truly be called a state past 2018, or even arguably past 2013, or 2003.

These measures, of course, were not fully successful. People escaped, and told these stories to others in the cities if they could even get there, however these gained little traction. Distrust of the government was already universal despite unanimous consumption of their products, and these “rumours” gave the Federation another excuse to further ramp up things, sending “anti-terrorism” squads into the major cities and placing stricter and stricter rules on them, including strict curfews and martial law. The Federation became increasingly concentrated around its major megacities, ideally making it easier to be controlled and surveilled, although [REDACTED]

— INFORMATION REDACTED —
NOTE THAT INFORMATION REGARDING EVENTS BEYOND 1.1.2020 ARE LOCKED UNDER A LEVEL FIVE SECURITY CLEARANCE—-

SYSTEMS FAILING—

—-the Truth eventually got out and became known by all of Europe.

And the Fires of Revolution were ignited once again.
Revolutionary Nutrition Package (Siliao)
Produced: 1992-2027
Weight: 1,450g (earliest record) - 300g (latest record, only for inner members of the CCP)
Calories: 1950 - 490 calories, 120g - <40g of protein

In many ways, Siliao was what kicked off the whole "standardized ration” craze. Originally meant to be a cheaper alternative to importing expensive foreign-made food, Siliao was made for the worker in mind. It was a thick, juicy tofu steak, usually grilled and served with soy sauce and rice. It could be eaten raw, though this was not recommended. In the early days, before pollution destroyed China’s arable land, the ration boasted almost 2000 calories, being a worker’s entire meal for the day. It contained soybeans, rice, potatoes, duckweed, and later on, bamboo shoots and insect larva. The ingredients were blended into a thick, gray slurry and then poured into a steak-shaped mold, dried, and dyed with a chemical now identified as toxic. 

For many, Siliao was eaten over a bowl of steaming hot rice. When that became unavailable, it was then usually dropped into a boiling pot of water and turned into a mushy stew. Citizens were required by law to “enjoy this revolutionary meal born of socialism and gratitude for the Chinese people”, and ironically, for most of the 1990s, it remained just as nutritious and flavorful. It wasn’t until the 2000s when the mass-die off of Chinese vegetation caused a massive overhaul of Siliao. 

Only Indochina, Korea, and isolated parts of Mongolia could be still used for agriculture, and with over 3 billion mouths to feed at one point, the CCP had to seriously rethink the efficiency of their staple food. Soybeans were becoming harder and harder to cultivate, and the coasts of China were becoming too polluted to grow duckweed. Even potatoes became scarce. 

The Chinese Governor of Vietnam suggested using bamboo as a sort of fiber supplement, and later on, crickets were mixed in to supplement the loss of protein. The ration also forgoed all attempts at appearing like a steak, instead just being a bland cube of colorless edible putty. Unfortunately, this new ration, “Siliao 1.5”, had the tendency to melt in the humid jungle on its way to China, and efforts were conducted to try to minimize it. 

By the 2010s, this was becoming an increasingly hard task. Much like the USA, China was running into issues regarding protein sources. A vast survey was conducted between 2010-2011, to try to find the most efficient protein source with the fewest acreage per crop grown. 

The results were a grimly short list. 
People’s Nourishment (Siliao 2.0)
Produced: 2012-2027
Weight: 1000g - 250g
Calories: Unknown, no detailed records exist

Unlike the USA, where cannibalism was simply the cheapest and most efficient option at the time, China truly had no other choice. The results of the 2011 survey were worryingly small - just tiny amounts of fringe weeds could be used to supplement siliao, and all in distant, far-reaching places. Cambodian water spinach, Mongolian sorghum, and pale kelp were all ground up and turned into a sort of protein paste. This did not have the intended effect, and with no other choice, the CCP was forced to turn to a final, forbidden source of protein: their own people. 

The exact process remains unknown, though evidence has surfaced that the more fanatical leaders of the CCP used Project 444 to wipe out ethnic minorities. At first, great care was made to keep the true nature of the ration a secret. The ration, which had dull green hue to it, was artificially dyed gray to look like the old Siliao 1.5. Those who learned the true secret of the product were isolated and executed, with the idea of China’s main ration being made out of people discredited as Soviet propaganda. 

Due to the way that Siliao 2.0 was produced, using isolated, remote minorities and those who did not regularly partake in recycled corpses, the protein count was estimated to remain relatively high for several years. 

The secret ingredient of Siliao remained secret until the Chinese civil war of 2019. With it, the truth came out, and the leadership of the CCP was surprised at how well the populace accepted it. They were eating people, yes, but they viewed it as a glorious sacrifice in the name of feeding their children. Some elderly citizens, who believed they were no longer fit to work, actually lined up to be turned into the strength of younger generations. 

There was a grim, yet pragmatic restructuring of Chinese society. Everyone, except for a few high ranking members of the Communist Party, was now united in this shameful contingency plan. Everyone grew complacent. Sacrificing oneself so that their commune to live a bit longer was seen as heroic, akin to going off to fight in a war. Many still ate with reluctance, and regular crops were of course still grown where they could be, but in the famine-strapped coast of China, in the towering, overheated metropolises of East Asia, it was the only option they had. 

By the 2020s, China had completely forgone all attempts at hiding their true protein source. When vegetable paste could not be transported in time, people received a jellied, greenish blob of human meat, which was then usually added to a stew. It became common practice for families to eat their dead loved ones instead of burying them, with many believing that by consuming them, they were making their dead grandfather or mother a part of them. 

Those in the military were always prioritized to receive the more nutritionally valuable “old Siliao 2.0”, the one with all the junk plants in it. The poor, all destitute, starving and waiting for death, huddled around their pots of boiled bones and cried, hoping that those who came after them would not be forced to such drastic measures. 
Soviet Farmer’s Bounty
Produced: 1998-present
Weight: Considerable variation. Most specimens produced during the Black Ages were between 500g - 200g. Modern iterations are usually 750g. 
Calories: Considerable variation. Ancient specimens ranged from 1875 calories - 945 calories, with 140g - 75g protein. Modern variants range from 2150 calories - 2275 calories, depending on the region, and usually contain 400g of protein. 

Unlike the vast majority of items on this list, the Soviet Farmer’s Bounty is the only one I can say that I have tried, both a modern iteration of it, and a remarkably well preserved sample found in a sealed container located in the Arctic ocean. It tasted about as well as one could expect centuries old food to taste. Still, I’ve had worse. 

Finding that ancient portal into the past is what started me down this culinary journey, and as I traveled the world, visiting places like New Johannesburg, Great Yellowknife, and Old Mecca, I learned more and more about the storied history of what people ate during the Black Ages. My journey went full circle when I went to Old Mirny and had a modern, refined version of what Farmer’s Bounty once was. 

In the olden days, of the First USSR, famine and food scarcity wasn’t an issue on the same level as it was for the rest of the world. Very few actually starved, and only then, it was criminals and prisoners who were deliberately mistreated (which was still a significant number). The main problem plaguing the USSR in regards to food was actually nutritional deficiencies. Homogenization of crops, the rapidly changing environment, and industrial pollution led to numerous health issues. Bone softening, loss of muscle mass, and dental problems were all common. The Politburo, back when power was shared and wasn’t hoarded by one man, tried to think of a solution to help their people. 

The answer was Farmer’s Bounty - a hard, tough loaf of bread that was paradoxically crumbly and flaky. Due to a mistranslation in the original documents, the first couple million loaves baked had raw dirt mixed in. This was thought to be a way of combating mineral deficiencies, as some uninformed party member thought it would be the most direct way of supplying vitamins to the populace. This earned it the name “dirt bread”, which it is still called in some regions today. 

The bread was a slurry of different grains like oat, barley, rye and wheat, held together with flour, and with bits of potato, sugar, and molasses in it. Local variations included ground up bones from livestock, and dried kelp. All in all, it was edible, and it was eaten sparingly. Many still ate austere but flavorful stews, washed down with vodka, and sometimes, a sweet beet pie was served as dessert. 

It was during the Great Silence (7-107 ASJ) that Farmer's Bounty saw a massive revival. The ancient Yakut Empire (87 - 114 ASJ), before the great Ural Swamp formed and split Siberia off from European Russia, resurrected the production of Farmer’s Bounty after finding several factories abandoned during the spread of the Great Death. The centuries-old soviet larders, stocked for a hypothetical war with Red China, were running out, and thus a new food must be made. 

After the Yakut Empire fell to civil war in 112 ASJ, the fledgling successor states became isolated by localized swamps and raids from southern khanates. Each of the City-Republics had a different way of making the bread, and while some kept to the old recipe, others adapted. Baranul was known for using ground up honeycombs to fortify the bread and strengthen immune systems, while Chita used sunflower seed oil to add carbohydrates to theirs. By the mid 26th century, each region of Siberia had a distinctly unique variant of “the bread”, as it was called now. Very few remembered its ancient Soviet roots. 

Nowadays, the Siberian Federation produces a standardized, enriched version of the bread for international export, called the Urozhay. This modern version uses egg and milk powder to add further nutritional benefit. Many poorer nations in Europe and North America import millions of loaves a year, shipped in with Yarkino’s fleet of hot air dirigibles, earning the Siberian Federation the title of “bread basket of the world”. Of course, many Siberians still hand-bake the unique regional loaves that got them through the Second Dark Age. 
Japanese Ramen Ration
Produced: 1997-Present
Weight: 80g-35g, modern variants are 75g
Calories: 900 - 575 calories, 16g - <1g protein. Modern variants are 1000 calories with 75g of protein 

Where the Soviets chose to create bread as their standardized ration, the Japanese instead chose to use noodles. At first, the block of enriched noodles was meant to be boiled and eaten like traditional ramen. Early on, many added additional ingredients to their ramen, such as boiled eggs, chopped onions, and some youth were known for even putting hot sauce in their ramen. 

These quickly became expensive luxury items though, and many were content to simply eat the noodles. The government actually looked into ways to bake flavor into the noodles, which was met with limited success. The primary ingredient for several decades was actually powdered sweet potato and rice, held together with rye flour and then thinly sliced into a noodle. 

As energy issues and water shortages started to rear their ugly head, the government then began to develop a new variant of the noodles that could be eaten when mixed with room-tempature water, and still taste (relatively) the same. Powdered buckwheat was added to the recipe, and while it was by no means enjoyable, it was still edible. Those in the higher echelons of society, like the Prime Minister’s cabinet before the Great Departing, actually preferred to eat their noodles chilled as a way of cooling down their stressful, sweat-laden bodies. 

In the early 2000s, some people became so driven by hunger that they began to eat the noodle block raw. This caused a huge increase in teeth being lost, and the Minister for Health advised the government to rework the recipe yet again, this time so that the noodles could be consumed completely raw without damage to one’s teeth. Fluoride was even added to the recipe for a very short time before the country's supplies ran out. 

Over 200 million people, trapped on one island, would eventually run into resource shortages -  no matter how efficiently one rations and allocates crops. In 2004, the government decided that in order to keep the country from mass starvation, all agricultural resources would need to be consolidated into producing one ration. Just about anything that grew was dumped into large vats, mixed in with fortifying chemicals, and turned into thin, stringy noodles. 

Many silently protested, but in the end, nothing was done. 

The recipe for the third iteration of the noodles was brought over to Kamchatka during the Great Exile of 1 ASJ. After encountering the Men of Deer, the two societies traded supplies and recipes. Japan provided them with advanced technology to help mitigate the melting climate, and the ethnic natives provided them with food. A new variant of the noodle was eventually developed, being a synthesis of the two cultures: the Great Uniter. 

The Uniting Noodle had roughly the same ingredients, though it was prepared in a very different way. For one, it was eaten only warm, by tossing the block into a boiling pot of water mixed with powdered lingonberries and mushrooms. The Japanese added in a pinch of sea weed, while the Koryak added in a cube of reindeer meat. 

Much of the Kamchatka survivors and Japan intermingled until creating a distinctly unique culture, one that still dominates Japan to this day. After the Atarashī Dentō restoration of 765 ASJ, 13 Prime Ministers of Japan have been Koryak. 

A modern, contemporary version of the Great Uniter Noodles is still made today, though it is usually used as emergency rations during times of famine or given as humanitarian aid. 
Japanese “Fish Patty” 
Produced: 2004-2027
Weight: 100g
Calories: 2000-400 calories, 500g - <1 g protein

In 2003, massive famines devastated the island nation of Japan. This forced the government to re-evalutate how they were allocating resources in regards to agriculture and livestock, and the decision was made to wean the population off of meat products, including fish. Mass die-offs of marine wildlife, plus chemicals and metals poisoning the ocean, had caused many fish to become abnormally small. The ban also had political reasons, as well - Japan was worried that sailing too close to Asia would provoke the Chinese Tiger. Fresh-water fish farms on land were also considered a waste of clean water, and until more efficient desalination methods could be created, the decision stayed. 

The official reason given to the populace was that animal products could become dangerous vectors for disease. Pets were euthanized, and most livestock was slaughtered and then rationed out. There are unconfirmed reports that other animals and pets were mixed in with the rationed meat. 

It was not enough, though - many were still dying of starvation, and stubbornly refusing to eat the remains of their sickly pets. Some were found to even be hiding their pets and feeding them the highly processed ramen rations. 

One callous member of the government, a representative from Tsu, Mie Prefecture, suggested that they instead claim they will rescind the order, but in place of fish and other meat products, Japan will recycle the dead for the very, very poor. According to some documents that have been lost to time (only traces and references to them have been found, to this date, no one has found the original documents), recycling the dead actually posed fewer health risks than eating contaminated fish. The representative simply reiterated that “protein was protein”, and that it was only a temporary measure. A connection many did not make was that this representative was the son and heir to the largest meat packing company in Japan during the Glorious Decades. His greed drove him to lobby for the processing of human meat into rations for the poor, and while the decision was extremely controversial (passing by a single vote), by 2004 the first of these “fish cakes” were made and distributed to the poor. 

After the Great Departing, many in the government chose to die with the secret, but the Steward Society reluctantly kept the operation running. The high numbers of suicides and causalities during the Third Sino-Japanese War ensured the supply never completely ran out. The Steward Society however invested in research into desalination efforts, and with the drastically reduced population, small-scale sardine farms were made in the years between the War and the Great Heat Waves. Actual fish began to be ground up and added to the rations, but the majority of it was still human flesh. After major advances in desalination technology were made in the late 2010s, isolated fish farms began popping up in major urban centers. 

On April 4th, 2020, the final “recycled” fish patty was made. Japan’s population had dropped to only 74 million, and research into efficient farming methods had, for the first time in over 20 years, brought food levels up to a point where the dead would not need to be recycled for protein. 

In late 2025, Japan began experimenting with a unique way of getting vitamins and minerals: evaporated, filtered sea water. The resulting fine powder had lingering radioactivity and was still poisonous if taking in too large of a dose, but it was Japan’s only option for getting certain vitamins and minerals by that point. Batches were fed to groups of fish with their flakes: if the fish died, then the batch was tossed back into the sea and they started over. This bizarre process lasted for less than a year, as the Solar Flare destroyed the production line for it and it was not considered a high enough priority to restore. 

When Japan left for Kamchatka, the population that managed to escape the Great Death were so few in number that rationing did not need to happen. Salmon became the most common fish eaten in Japanese Kamchatka. 
Patagonian Sun Tortilla
Produced: 2003-2067
Weight: 100g 
Calories: 500 - 300 calories, 20 - 9g protein 

The Red Summer of 2003, like many other nations, prompted the Patagonian Alliance to pool their agricultural resources to make a bare-minimum emergency ration. Unlike other rations in this list, it was never meant to be eaten alone. Much like the local variants of the Soviet Farmer’s Bounty, each of the autonomous Patagonian Republics had different toppings they favored. 

Throughout the years, the overall recipe remained more or less the same, though the ratio of some minor ingredients changed based on harvests. Cornmeal was used as a base, and quinoa powder was sprinkled in when available. Powdered soy beans and other legumes were then mixed in to add additional nutrients, along with seed oil to fortify the product and make it last longer. 

The tortilla could be eaten plain, with nothing on it, but this was not recommended. Many would grill the tortilla and make quesadillas, soft-shell tacos, and crispy pies. Before the total ban on meat, and then all animal products, many would add ground chicken and shredded cheese. Some farmers would add an egg for extra protein before going out to work on the fields. 

Toppings varied from region to region, usually consisting of local staples. In Bolivia, it was common to spread a paste of mashed potatoes, spiced with chopped tomatoes and chilis. In Paraguay, many would pickle various herbs like garlic and parsley overnight, fry them in the pickled brine, and add them to the tortilla, along with a mix of popped corn kernels, tomato slices, and serve them with pumpkin jerky. Rolling carrots in the tortilla and spreading it with kale was a popular fad in Uruguay among those who were on the move between the many agrarian cities. In Chile, the cuisine was far more varied, as those closer to the shores had a completely different range of ingredients than those in the highlands. On the coastal shores, many fried theirs in fish oil and topped it with anchovies to tinge it with the taste of the sea, while those in the Andeans preferred more subtle, earthy flavors from various mountain herbs. Argentina had the most variety, with assorted fruits ground up into a paste and spread across the tortilla as a sweet treat, dipped in a runny tomato-based sauce, or grilled and used to make Soviet-inspired “Patagonian Perogies”. 

During the Patagonian Colonization of Antarctica, several crops ended up not surviving in the harsh climate, and the tortilla became less and less popular. The Antarctic variant of the tortilla was made with maize, corn and quinoa flour and amaranth was mixed in for fiber. Potatoes and carrots were the most common topping, though the settlers gradually shifted towards making stews and bread instead of the tortillas. 
Mexican Eagle Tortilla
Produced: 1996-2020
Weight: 100g
Calories: 400 - 200 calories, 15 - 2g protein 

The Mexican “Patriotic National Hunger Relief Ration” was a tortilla inspired by the Graves administration’s hunger relief programs, by nationalizing all of Mexico’s food production lines and consolidating them to coordinate against famine. Mexico’s tortilla ration is actually what inspired the Patagonian variant that came afterwards. 

The tortilla was made with maize flour and bits of amaranth mixed in, with black beans for protein and tomatoes for flavor. The tortillas were sometimes referred to as “Eagle tortillas”, for the Mexican eagle burnt into the center of the tortilla. The tortillas were regarded as extremely crumbly, and also didn’t last long in extremely dry environments. By 2003, they were only produced in areas south of Mexico City. 

Over 300 million tortillas were produced during the “Golden Age” of socialist Mexico (1996-2006), yet not even 100 million were produced during Valdez’s dictatorship. Instead, around 2014, Mexico’s military junta began distributing a maize-based gruel with chunks of bread in it. This slowly turned into a mystery-meat laden stew, and when Valdez was assassinated in 2021, the coordinated production of rations became completely dismantled. Many began to eat the food completely raw, the withered husk and all. 
Venezuelan Victory Cornbread
Produced: 1973-1995
Weight: 400g
Calories: 1500 calories, 50g protein

“Victory Cornbread” is a unique item in this list in that it was produced during the Glorious Decades and not created as a result of the Shock. It was created in mid-1973, as a way of ensuring the impoverished citizens of Venezuela (one of the poorest countries before the Crash of 1988) had enough to eat and thus might stay and build up the country, instead of emigrating to a place like Mexico, Costa Rica, or Brazil. 

Using loans from the IMF, China, and the USA, Venezuela’s government imported industrial equipment on a massive scale and began to manufacture huge amounts of cornbread. This cornbread was made with ingredients that grew in Venezuela, with the original intention of them becoming self-sufficient, however this never panned out. Venezuela kept importing more and more raw material, and while they were able to make some profit and start to pay off their debts, the economic situation kept many in the slums of Venezuela dependent on the imported food. 

Using the magic of space-age petroleum-based chemicals, the cornbread was enriched with a full day’s worth of recommended vitamins and minerals. Sugar from Brazil, corn from the USA, cassava from Nigeria, soybeans from Argentina, black beans from Mexico, and rice vinegar from Thailand were all imported in record numbers. A special blend of multivitamins, essential minerals and preservatives, produced by a company that went bankrupt in 1989, was then added to the mixture. Many considered it a wonder of science, of an entire meal’s worth of nutrition in a single serving of cornbread, but in a world where wagyu beef, caviar and vintage wines were no longer considered a delicacy but the norm, the Victory Cornbread remained obscure and only eaten by those with no other choice.

Over 1 billion servings, all packaged in hermetically sealed plastic containers, were manufactured between 1973 and 1988. After the Crash of 1988, the pragmatic government accepted raw ingredients as payment for Venezuelan oil. Some poorer nations in Africa actually ended up buying cornbread instead of oil. Production of the bread slowed significantly in 1990, and the last batch was made sometime in 1995. Government forces during the Civil War initially controlled the supply, but as it dragged on, the Red Hand Confederacy began to capture supply depots and turn them into anarchistic communes. Over time, these communes were targeted and destroyed by rival factions. Victory cornbread became a highly sought-after item in Venezuela during the Black Ages. The Red Hand began burying caches of guns, ammunition, cornbread and water, using them during the fight against Brazil and later the Cartel. These caches ended up being life-saving treasure troves for the survivors in the region (part of the Republic of Libertalia in the present day). 
Brazilian “Sao Paulo Soup” (gruel)
Produced: 1993-2026
Weight: 230g - 60g
Calories: 400 calories - 300 calories, 20g - 3g protein 

“Sao Paulo Soup” was the ironic name given to the government ration distributed to the citizens of Brazil. Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, it was given only to prisoners of war, but after the civil war started, it became the default emergency food for all civilians - they were just simply given more portions than prisoners. 

As such, the gruel was a thick, syrupy slop that danced the line between liquid and solid. The ingredients varied wildly based on the region, but a few things were common enough to be staples. The primary base was a mix of cassava roots and rice. In the early years of the civil war, soybeans were used as protein for the civilians, but prisoners were unknowingly fed the remains of their comrades. Some soldiers distributed the prisoner variant to civilians. When MREs were not available, soldiers would eat the gruel with a side of black beans and carrot shavings. The suspicious and untrustworthy nature of the soup made it easy for many of the rebels to eventually switch to veganism and eat Patagonian tortillas. 

Near the end of the civil war, when a majority of the civilian population was either dead or aligned with the socialist Rebel Coast, the gruel stopped being made, as prisoners were simply killed on the spot. The remnants of the military had enough left over MREs, and while they weren’t much better than the gruel, it did make the fragments of the government less dependent on farms. 
ANZ Standardized Nutrition Ration (Super Spread)
Produced: 2016 - 2091
Weight: 200g
Calories: 40 calories, 4g protein per 3g spread

When famine reared its ugly head, the Union of Australia and New Zealand was unfazed. As it turns out, their solution was invented all the way back in the 1920s: a vegetable spread filled with vitamins and minerals. During the first Great Heat Wave, even the advanced nation of ANZ began to struggle. One of the first decisions of this new unified government was how to deal with this shortage, minor as it was.

A few months of research later, and the Super Spread was created. Still using brewer’s yeast and grain residue as the base, various other ingredients were added: micro-algae grown in vats, ground emu meat, powdered seaweed, and canola oil. The spread had a salty, buttery taste, and lasted for centuries when properly sealed. 

Part of the genius of the Super Spread is that it forced the populace to diversify their diets. The Super Spread was frequently added to bread, but some people spread it over emu drumsticks. More exotic ways of consuming it included making quesadillas and crepes with the spread mixed into the dough. 

When Australia began to colonize Antarctica, the Super Spread’s recipe was gradually changed to be adapted to the new availability of resources. Emu meat was replaced with soybean butter and the algae was replaced with powdered pumpkin seeds. As the settlers in Antarctica adapted to the changing conditions, the Super Spread slowly evolved into a pumpkin-flavored jelly that could be eaten raw. 
Commonwealth Kaszanka (blood sausage)
Produced: 2015-2035
Weight: 200g
Calories: 550 calories, 30g protein 

The Commonwealth Kaszanka was created after the Beer Revolution, when President Kowalski used his business connections to scrape together a barely-edible ration for the very poor. It was better than the alternative the communists had planned for them: something along the lines of “The People’s Long Pork”. 
This “Polish Pork” was still made, though never ever fed to other members of the Commonwealth - agitators were turned into processed crackers and sold abroad to the nations desperate enough. The Federation in particular was their biggest customer, giving Poland old weapons, in an effort to keep Moscow, Stockholm, Warsaw, and Berlin all at each other’s throats. 

Still, the kaszanka helped the Polish people limp through the Black Ages and into the Great Silence. Despite being called a blood sausage, the Kaszanka actually lacked blood. It was a thin, delicate tube of ground mushrooms and seed pastes molded to feel somewhat like a sausage, and filled with groats of all types of grains. Potatoes were then shoved in, and finally, it was soaked with beet juice to at least pretend like it was made with blood. In fact, the food was ironically vegan. 

There were some who resented this. 

Underground “meat rings” sprung up across occupied Hungary, leading to the Budapest Massacre of 2028. Poland, running from the sea and the vengeful Nordic Army, looked to the East and took much of what used to be the USSR. By 2033, Poland had taken over and annexed the Baltic States, Belarus, and parts of Ukraine and Russia. They still control this region to this day. In antiquity, their reach stretched all the way to Moscow. 

Their reason for the vast annexation was to get access to the vast majority of habitable land in Eastern Europe. Long pork would be the next, inevitable step, and rather than stoop to that level, the survivors of WWIII took the fertile eastern lands as the spoils of war. Soon, the blood sausage was replaced with a new, protein rich version, using fly cultures, rat bones and other animal products! Fun! In 2035, the government of Greater Poland unveiled a brand new blood sausage: one that had actual blood in it. 

At long last, Poland was yet again wealthy enough to feed the poor the parts of livestock the rich didn’t want. 
Europa’s Staatesgenshek (borsht) 
Produced: 2015-2035
Weight: 500g
Calories: 1250 - 750 calories, 53 - 19g protein

After the German-Soviet Split, the Democratic Republic of Germany internally reformed into the State of Europa. Their ideology shifted away from Soviet-inspired communism to a unique blend of nationalism, Marxism, and environmentalism. Using the Great Heat Wave to take complete control of all land allocation, irrigation and labor, Chancellor Volkenhammer championed harsh and extreme reforms. 

“Calorie theft” became a crime punishable by “environmental re-education”, which essentially was a polite euphemism for being worked to death in a state-owned green house. Because East Germany and Czechia were much smaller than compared to the Polish Commonwealth, the Nordic Union or even the United Kingdom, arable land was prioritized above all else. The countryside was completely evacuated, and turned into a sprawling maze of irrigation canals, hydroelectric dams, and desalination plants. Farms doubled as military outposts, and a massive wall was built between the Federation and East Germany. The Stasi began to focus on eco-terrorists and smugglers rather than political opponents. 

And who did Europa blame for the horrible state of the world? Pretty much everyone but them. The Soviets, the Nordics, the Polish, their corrupt brothers in the West, the Anglos, the Americans, and the Chinese. “New Marxism”, as the ideology became called, rejected the idea that industrial progress always benefitted the worker - instead, because nature was the ultimate source of all industry, the working class must evolve in pace with nature or else end up like the rest of the world. Certain professions, like coal miners and gas workers, were no longer allowed to unionize. Instead, farmers and factory workers became the dominant factions within the government. Farmers in particular gained large amounts of power. 

Research conducted throughout 2015 resulted in the creation of a totally unique and original creation: the Staatesgenshek, which is allegedly the “real” borscht. According to ancient myths, using beets to create soup was actually stolen by Russian invaders who took the idea from hard-working German proto-Marxists. 

This Germanic offshoot of borscht used beets as its main stock, but also added in bits of cabbage, along with powdered rutabaga and parsnip when supplies permitted. Cream of rye was mixed in, along with chunks of potatoes and powdered soybeans. The most important ingredient was actually a tiny dash of mustard, and it was considered to be “false borscht” without it. Crusty bread was served with the soup, though sometimes the bread would be sliced into chunks and mixed with the broth. 
Ethiopian Injera
Produced: 2019-2223
Weight: Varied, ranged from ~60g and 140g
Calories: Varied, ranged from ~260 calories and 940 calories, 13g to <1g protein

Ethiopian injera was not a combined effort of several countries to tackle famine. Instead, it spread as a cultural product. The Great Lakes of Africa provided irrigation water for all of the common staples: teff, sorghum, millet and cassava provided the base, and ground up locusts and powdered fish scales were usually mixed in for added fortification. Some believed that adding in a pinch of gunpowder made one stronger and fearless. 

The injera spread across Africa, following the supply lines of the Water Lords. It was given as gifts to merchants and in tribute to raiders. Caravans transporting it reached as far south as the Middle Congo and as far east as the Great Lake of Chad. In times of famine, the lesser Kantiba (rulers of communities but not powerful enough to control multiple towns) would hand out injera to the farmers and serfs, and the social contract (sometimes called the Way of Water) was maintained. 

Injera was also used in rituals for the New Ethiopian Church, a unique blend of Christianity, neo-paganism, and Islam. Women ate the injera at certain times of the day (usually at dusk) as it was believed to help with fertility. Crops that would later become injera were blessed routinely by local priests, and in the 2100s, it became taboo to build churches on fertile land. Priests claimed that injera was made to “honor the skin of God”, and to eat it is to seek holiness. For many, it was a life giving staple. 

Injera was eaten with a selection of vegetables, meat, and sometimes as a bread bowl for soups. Eating a fruit, rolled in injera, was a common breakfast. Fried potatoes were commonly served at lunch, and whatever protein was at hand (chicken, cow, human) was served at the end of the day. Lords, soldiers and laborers were given larger portions of protein, while women, slaves and merchants were given minimal portions. 

Injera eventually fell out of favor in the 23rd century during the Red Sea Crusades, and the New Ethiopian Church was dismantled. Because the bread had been ritualized so heavily, it was forbidden by the Turkish Caliphate. 

In the modern day, the baking of bread is still considered taboo in some parts of Abyssinia. 

THE LONDON TIMES
12th May 2003

Return of the Ripper: brutal copycat murders terrify London

WHITECHAPEL, TOWER HAMLETS, LONDON - George Cromey, technician at the coal-fired Shadwell Power Plant, was just returning from his daily shift, having worked three hours overtime to fix a fault on one of the turbines. At around eleven at night, having picked up a package of food from the local store, he arrived at his home on the newly-built King John Estate. He entered the property, only to find outside his front door the corpse of a young woman in her forties with a knife wedged in her back and drying blood sprayed on the wooden floor. Immediately, he dialled 999 on the estate phone and a police unit arrived fifteen minutes later, but by that time the killer had long gone. Upon further examination, the woman - a prostitute named Mary Wilkins - was found to have been dead for an hour, and had overly many stab wounds, 37 to be exact, primarily in the chest and abdomen. Normally, the fingerprints on the knife would be matched to a database, but recent budget cuts to the police have prevented this from happening and the culprit being found.
Readers may be mistaken to think this was from the year of 1888, when Jack the Ripper roamed the East End’s streets, when in actuality this case took place three weeks ago, and was largely unreported by outlets until now. Since then, five other murders have been reported, all having disturbing similarities. The victims were female prostitutes, they were middle-aged, and were killed with a sickening level of brutality, with major incisions and mutilations in the throat and the abdomen. Our more knowledgeable readers would recognize these to also be similarities to the Whitechapel murders of 1888, conducted by an unknown person commonly known as Jack the Ripper (despite the name coming from a hoax letter).
It is thus clear to the police and to all that these are copycat murders, performed by a psychopath whose motives lie in the shadows. You could argue this is completely wrong, these murders are not connected, after all, Whitechapel, already a hotspot of crime, recorded a record 51 murders last year, likely many more in reality. Yet almost none of them have the same sadistic brutality inflicted on them, and the cases are all too similar to not be related. This is not the first time copycat murders were attempted in the area - in 2001 a prostitute was found dead with similar injuries, and a message made in blood titled “RIPPER” was drawn on the wall. The culprit, a 53-year-old mentally ill man, was caught the following day. It is unknown whether the motive and culprit in this case is similar, however. The police publicly believe this is the most likely scenario, however.
The area of Whitechapel, as well as much of East London, looks comparatively different from the late 19th century, however 

The European Federation sourcebook
Containing never seen before recordings, journal entries, and other sources from people around the Federation throughout its history.

The Birth of the Federation
Summary
The end of the Brussels Conference was a momentous moment in European history. The topic of a united European Federation had been increasingly discussed during the Fabulous Decades, as European governments cooperated furthermore, yet it was never seriously debated a possibility, likely due to the (relatively) short duration of prosperity. Following the Crash, and the beginning of the Red Decades, as all of Western Europe elected socialist governments and suffered with extortionate energy prices and devastating heatwaves, nations started genuinely discussing it as a possibility for the continent’s survival. The idea was becoming increasingly popular among the public following America’s financial and nutritional bailout of Europe in the Red Summer, and the fear that Europe would become an American puppet as the climate crisis worsened.

The Brussels Conference, which was intended to decide the fate of the European Economic Community (EEC) ended on Monday the 7th of June 1993 with the announcement of the formation of the European Federation among members of the EEC. The announcement produced a feeling of hope among the European people, even on the extreme, as they felt Europe would finally be able to stand on the level of the superpowers and weather the economic and environmental crises. This short-lived optimism continued after the founding of the Federation at the beginning of March 1994, into the following year before reality set in and Europe faced it’s first major challenges.

Extract from the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (Frankfurt General Newspaper), 1.6.1993
Translated from its original script in German
AFTER FIRST WEEK, BRUSSELS CONFERENCE TALKS CONTINUE, FATE OF EEC YET TO BE DECIDED
BRUSSELS, BELGIUM - The Brussels Conference has now entered its seventh day, with talks between the heads of state and government of the European Economic Community still ongoing. News coming out of the conference continues to be sparse, the organisers having chosen to hold it behind closed doors to prevent the spread of rumour. When world leaders exit the Charlemagne Building and head back to their hotels as the days end, they and their aides still refuse to comment on the course of the conference, giving only small, noncommittal hints such as “Progress is going well” or “Talks have been slightly bumpy”. As Western Europe and the world undergoes its greatest crisis in modern history, expectations are high and the public cautiously optimistic of the results.

Opinion from Europe’s executives have been scarce, but discussion among the legislature has been much more widespread. Opinion across the German political spectrum remains positive to the conference and negotiations. While Chancellor Kruspe, who is heavily involved in the conference, has remained tight-lipped as a result, the SPD’s Vice President of the Bundestag Menno Ahlers gave a speech to the Bundestag yesterday evening, stressing the “dire importance for a successful outcome to the conference” and that “Europe may need something akin to complete federalisation if it wants to survive the coming years”. His position is radical compared to many of his own party’s members of the Bundestag, with 23 members signing a letter to the Chancellor that was sent on Sunday, warning of the risks of a federalised Europe, and its potential impact on “individual and workers’ freedom”. Kruspe has tried to balance out the desires of the left and right of the SPD in his tenure as head of the party, but this schism may turn out to be one of the more challenging ones to overcome. The CDU, CSU, and FDP have also reacted positively to the negotiations, despite some conflict within the former two, meaning the outcome of the conference has near unanimous support in the Bundestag. In other nations, reactions have also been generally positive. There is, however, a brewing split within the French Communist Party, whose leader and President of France has gone against the wishes of much of her party’s base by attending the conference. There is additionally much dispute within the governing Labour Party in the United Kingdom, which contains a large Eurosceptic faction, and there has been much controversy in Italy’s political scene over the negotiations.

The conference was originally held to decide the future of the EEC as Western Europe battles the aftermath of the Crash and accelerating global climate change, however the closed doors format of it has unintentionally created the mass spread of rumour among the public this past week. These range from the expansion of the role of the EEC to cover migration and foreign policy to create a “European Union”, to the federalisation of Western Europe to create a “European Federation”, to the EEC applying to join the Warsaw Pact. The Charlemagne Building yesterday at midday was surrounded by a few thousand protestors bearing the German tricolour and chanting anti-federalisation slogans such as “Preserve Germany’s independence” and “We don’t need a Federation”. Despite polls showing the vast majority of Germans in favour of a Federation, and even more in favour of an expansion of the EEC’s power, the numerous protests outside the conference displays there is a large section of the population that are strongly against this, and could pose a threat to the practically inevitable increasing federalisation of Western Europe.

Nevertheless, despite the various political challenges hovering over the conference, Western Europe’s leaders are still hard at work, engaging in tireless negotiations and talks to work out a new deal for Europe. The future of the... (continued on page ---) (text illegible)

Excerpt from a speech by President of the European Council and Danish Prime Minister Ellen Larsen announcing the formation of the European Federation, 7.6.1993
*The Danish Prime Minister delivered the first part of the speech as the office of the President of the European Council was rotated between member states of the EEC every six months.


The Federation’s Early Years
-Recording of the ending of the Brussels Conference announcing the formation of the European Federation
-Parts of the Federal Constitution
-1994 federal election results
Terrorism and Extremism in Europe
-Interview of a young member of the Esercito del Popolo
-Journal entry - a woman goes out to vote in 1999 and narrowly survives a terrorist attack
-1999 federal election results
-Extract from a Europa Times article about desertification and extremism in southern Spain
The Red Summer
-Red Summer temperature highs
-Audio of speech by ECL leader announcing an imminent revolution
-Journal entry - March on Seville
-Copy of speech delivered by FAO leader in Andalusia announcing formation of EEL
-Police report of March on Naples
-Fragmented audio of speech by PES representative against Crackdown in Parliament
-Copies of parts of Crackdown Acts

A NEW EUROPEAN ORDER - What if the NEF won in 1999?
This is a scenario I’ve had in my head for quite a while that I personally find interesting, and will try write out to get myself back into the TL. It will be a collection of my thoughts on how it will affect different areas of the Federation and the lasting consequences of it. In the original scenario, the 1999 European federal election had the “socialist” PES keeping power, however with a reduced vote share and a massive surge for the far-right NEF. This alternate scenario has the NEF, in a shock event, gain the most seats and form a coalition with the dying conservative EPP, which will do anything to maintain relevancy.

Background - What is the NEF?
The NEF (National European Front) was a fusion of various Western European far-right parties following the creation of the Federation in 1994. These include France’s National Front, Germany’s National Democratic Party and Italy’s Italian Social Movement, alongside a variety of others. In their 1999 manifesto “For a New European Order”, they promised:

-An increasing decentralisation of the Federation and more powers given to the state governments
-A zero-tolerance policy on immigration, to “protect Europe’s borders”
-Mass deportations of illegal immigrants, and “renewed efforts to protect Europe’s cultures”
-Removal of “anti-European” judges from the courts and the establishment of a “Judicial Aptitude Test” to filter out “unpatriotic” judges
-Increased funding to the police and usage of the military to stamp out crime and “domestic unrest” (you may remember this is similar to what the Fed did following the Crackdown)
-A banning and proscribing of paramilitary organisations and a “return to order on the streets”
-Mandatory hard labour for prisoners to solve the food crisis
-Implementation of heavy tariffs on all nations to “protect European goods”
-Nationalisation of major corporations and money “given back to the European people”

As you can see, they ran on a hard-right platform with vague economically leftist notions that many knew would not be followed through. The actions of many NEF politicians, however, showed to be far more extreme than the implications of the party programme. Several minor and some major politicians were pictured doing the Hitler salute, and some openly talked about massacring protestors and banning leftist parties. The NEF was a big-tent party containing a variety of some extreme and some less extreme hard-right parties, however the extreme right soon dominated over the moderates, and at its heart the NEF was proudly neo-fascist.

The NEF also had open affiliations with many far-right extremist terrorist groups which caused havoc in 1990s Europe. The trouble they got in the courts led them to have an extreme fixation with controlling the judiciary, which was seen as the main obstacle to their success. Some people consider their extremism to be what prevented them from taking power in 1999 as many would-be voters were fearful of their terrorist connections and prideful authoritarianism. However, considering the success of outright communists in many parts of Europe (e.g. the 1995 Paris mayoral election), it is likely their extremism contributed to them performing so well.

Realistically, though, them taking power was a pipe dream. Too many voters disliked their extremism for them to gain enough votes to take power, and they only had the small EPP as a potential coalition partner. Their hard limit was likely around 35% of total votes, not enough for even a majority coalition. This scenario is incredibly implausible, however, with a few ASBs, many more violent leftist demonstrations, a worse societal collapse in the Middle East and North Africa, and a more lax European immigration policy, they could just barely come into power in the Federation and return the demonic spectres of Fascism and Nazism to the continent once more.

---

THE NEW YORK TIMES
Wednesday, April 14th, 1999

EXTREME RIGHT WIN SHOCK VICTORY IN EUROPEAN FEDERAL ELECTION
DEFEATED SOCIALISTS VOW TO “FIGHT ON”
ULTRA-NATIONALISM RESURGENT ACROSS EUROPE ONCE MORE

---

On April 14, 1999, the results come in, and are a shock to everyone. The National European Front won a plurality of seats with roughly 41% of the popular vote, the PES coming in second place with 22% and the communists with 18%. The conservative EPP’s vote share cratered, falling to a meagre 11%. They were soon approached by the NEF to form a coalition government. It took only a few days for negotiations to conclude, due to intimidation of the party by fascist paramilitaries, the radical shifting of the EPP to the right over the campaign [1], and a belief by some that they would be able to moderate them. This would prove to only be somewhat correct. On the other side, reactions were mixed. The PES were despairful at the result, not knowing how the predictions were so wrong and fearful they would be suppressed and banned. The ECL were also fearful, but pleased at their good results and optimistic the unions and paramilitaries would bring the government down soon enough. Both parties refused to cooperate to stop the fascist menace, and it seemed a scene reminiscent of 1933 Germany was playing out, with little to stop it. Radical changes would be made over the coming years.

“The refugees are a bane to our society” - immigration and deportation policy under the NEF

The first major piece of legislation that the new government passed was the Illegal Migration and Mass Deportation Act, a law which suspended immigration into the Federation and treated migrant boats as threats, allowing and encouraging the European Navy and Coast Guard to shoot down the boats. It also created provisions and gave the police powers to arrest and deport “illegal immigrants”, the specifics of that made unclear.

The act soon ran into many problems, the majority being caused by the government simply not having the money to conduct all of this. Successive federal budgets passed by the NEF increased funding for law enforcement, immigration agencies and the military (the budgets will be discussed later), but even with that, the cost of mass deportations and shooting the boats was simply too much. The navy continuously lacked funding, and operating the ships required large amounts of fossil fuels, which the Federation had been struggling to find since the summer of 1988. Only a few ships were deployed at any given time, and refugee boats easily slipped through them to the mainland. Even despite hearing of the new government, refugees still decided it was worth trying to reach Europe to escape the hell their homeland had become. Once reaching the Federation, they were often able to slip into the underworld of many major cities and become practically undetectable, often working in illegal occupations or essentially as slaves to the vast criminal gangs. Legal immigration was already close to nonexistent, and so the total ban had little effect. Illegal immigration did show a marked decrease, but still occurred on a large scale. [2]

The mass deportations policy was also, unsurprisingly, unworkable. The police remained incredibly underfunded, and detecting who was illegal proved to be immensely difficult. Quotas were set by the government for the amount to be arrested by a regional department every day, and to meet them the police began ignoring legality and arrested anyone who was non-white and looked suspicious to them, even if they were there legally. The detaining in November 1999 of a legal immigrant who heavily contributed to the local community and ran a food bank in Paris sparked weeks of brutal race riots, which often ended up incredibly bloody as paramilitaries stepped in. (The unrest again will be covered later) The police already had their hands full, and so the government created a whole new branch named the IEB (Immigration Enforcement Bureau) whose job was to conduct deportations and find illegal immigrants faster than the police due to having certain protections from the law, however the government struggled to find extra funds for them, and they performed dismally as a department. The IEB also suffered from many court challenges as a result, some successful, further fuelling the government’s hatred of them. Another major issue was how the deportations would be conducted. Almost everyone deported or targeted for deportation came from the Middle East or North Africa, and the only way to get there was via boat travel. However, the Federation had few usable boats that weren’t reserved for trade and the military. The military did assist, but running the ships cost fuel, and the Federation had little of that. The government did consider seizing the private boats of people including fishermen, however, when considering the massive backlash it would face from their base, they decided against it, and deportations took place at a frustratingly slow pace.

As the immigration agenda of the government quickly fell to pieces, they knew they had to act decisively and quickly. Immigration was easily the biggest issue of their supporters and despite their draconian nature had lots of support among the European populace. In late 2000, after dismal migration statistics, the immigration minister was replaced with a much more hardline figure and the government decided on two key measures to solve the issue. One was to use the paramilitaries to conduct seizures of immigrants quicker (they had already been integrated into the police force weeks ago), and the other was to do away with the failed policy of deportation entirely, and instead put them to work for the country, creating the Federation’s first concentration camps.

The paramilitaries acted with incredible brutality in immigrant raids, driven by their vision of many of them as inhuman following years of relentless propaganda and indoctrination. Oftentimes, many would die in these raids, and most underwent horrific beatings, creating many court challenges of their own. Leftist paramilitaries stepped up their efforts to stop the raids, intervening several times and successfully saving many. The concentration camps were truly dreadful places, especially at their inception. Detainees would do many hours of strenuous work every day for no pay, being practically worked to death in unhygienic conditions with very little food or water. The conditions were quickly publicised, and were met with colossal backlash, even from the NEF’s base, many of whom didn’t want any immigrants working at all in the country. This occurred despite the NEF repeatedly and baselessly claiming conditions were well in them, and they were doing hard work for the country. Faced with imminent revolt from the EPP and the possible collapse of the government, they backtracked, and promised to improve conditions in the camps as soon as possible. However, the backlash remained, and many camps would soon end up closing due to political pressure and financial difficulties, their inhabitants simply sent to prisons. The status quo continued until the Red Summer, with there being no other real options for the NEF to do - if they moderated they would lose their base, if they radicalised they would lose their coalition. The immigration policy of the NEF had catastrophically failed, with targets hardly being met and resistance against them higher than ever before.

“Anti-sovereignty, anti-nationalism, anti-European, that is the state of this traitorous judiciary” - the fight against and rigging of Europe’s courts by the NEF

Europe’s judiciary had been the cause of many headaches and setbacks for the NEF since their founding. Their paramilitaries and their brutality had given them many negative run-ins with the law and policies in their state governments had been overturned by them before, for instance Italy’s deportation law in 1999, helping galvanise the NEF’s voters and bringing them a majority in the federal government. Now, their eyes were set upon it, ready to destroy their neutrality once and for all.

“The media is such a godlike tool to be wielded” - the collapse of press freedom under the NEF

“They are not human, just scum of the Earth” - the suppression of the left and (attempted) of crime by the NEF

“We cannot go down like in 1933” - the shift of the PES to the left and alliance with the Communists

“We fear this government could bring an immeasurable collapse of order” - the NEF’s relations with FulTec and the foodstuffs industry


[1] In the original scenario they only somewhat did that, and following the failure returned to the centre-right in collaboration with the liberal ALDE.
[2] In the original scenario the ban on refugees does cause a slight drop in illegal migration, however this is temporary, and the numbers remain high.
Discord server: 
https://discord.gg/fPHxtHZpva 
When joining, please set your nickname to your AltHist name so it's easier to communicate

Finish neutral countries research 
Finish misc asia country research
Do preliminary religion research
Do preliminary alternative energies research
Do preliminary army research 
Calculate nuclear arsenals for each country

Prelude: The Glorious Decades (North America, Europe and Japan 1960-1988)
[POINT OF DIVERGENCE] November 8, 1960: Pharmacologist Frances Oldham Kelsey, a reviewer of new drug applications for the US Food and Drug Administration, is severely injured in a car accident. Although she eventually recovers after a couple of months, it is too late for her to stop the approval of thalidomide in the United States in December 1960.
Part 2: A Fractured World (EU, China, USSR)
EU after the 2000s (FulTec)
All notes I may make are at the bottom of the EU chapter’s tab (Part 2-2)
USSR after 2010 (Urozhay)
Fully written 
China after 2020 (Siliao) 
Fully written! Removing my notes to free up space haha
How they each relate to the US and are practically ran the exact same
Part 3: A Country in Name Only (2024 election+Food, Inc)
Finished!

Bonus Interludes:
South America and Latin America, with a focus on Brazil, Argentina, and Mexico
Detailed history on other major nations that still exist by 2027: Japan, Australia + New Zealand, GAR, Nordic Union, Switzerland
Vatican and how the leaders of major religions dealt with things
Alternative energies
State of the remaining nation’s armies by 2027

Part 4: The Living Death (credits to whoever on main thread mentioned that) (2024-27+solar storm)

The Antarctica Conference (at start). The purpose of the Antarctic Conference was that the ruling elites of the remaining nations had realized that at this rate, the world would no longer become habitable, for everyone, by 2040. Unless a huge amount of people were to suddenly die, there was no hope for anyone. The nations talk about various ways that they could reform lifestyles or delay the 2040 deadline, but all of them would require incomprehensible amounts of resources to effectively pull off - resources that nobody had at this point. Even a mass euthanasia project would be infeasible due to damage to global wind currents. The countries ultimately decide on slowly moving important citizens (scientists, engineers, wealthy people) to cooler places, and gradually phase out their government before leaving 90% of the population to starve. 
China kicked out of conference because it is blamed for tempting the world with the Glorious Decades. No one actually believes this, they are just trying to blame someone 
Israel is not invited for the same reason, and no-one is even sure if they still exist
Canada is not invited out of envy 
Canada figures out they’re doing shady shit but can’t exactly put their finger on what or why, they begin some preparations for potential crisis (too little too late)
States not invited due to civil war conditions/collapse
Mexican Junta
Venezuelan Junta
GAR is not invited (while the leaders of the remaining nations are greedy despots, they aren’t racists - except for maybe East Germany.)
Countries/Companies in the Antarctica Conference: Pretty much the state of the world in 2026
United States of America
Food, Inc
Democratic People’s Republic of Argentina
Federal Socialist Republic of Ireland
United Kingdom of Great Britain 
Nordic Union
European Federation
FulTec
Switzerland
Polish Commonwealth
Democratic People’s Republic of Germany (Fourth Reich) 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Keralan Junta (Remnant of India)
Union of Australia and New Zealand
Japan
Great Empire of Ethiopia
Talk about what the major countries have been doing between 2023-2026
Countries preparing for GD, secret planning. Ends with solar storm
Canadian invasion plans are drafted up
China begins a mass conscription, progress of Project Eyes of Heaven is stalled
Countries begin building bunkers
GAR and East Germany make a secret alliance 
Argentina settles in the Andean Mountains, USSR takes over Yuzhny Island, Nordic Countries get Svalbard, USA goes to Alaska and Greenland, EF goes to Iceland, Japan goes to Russian Far East, and Australia + New Zealand go to Tasmania
Due to Civil War conditions, Ireland + UK’s continuity of government bunkers aren’t finished 
East Germany built a bunker below Berlin
Poland does IDK yet
GAR realizes something is up because Germany tells them, so they build bunkers, but that doesn’t go to plan…
Part 5: Hell on Earth (Aftermath of storm, WW3)

The aftermath of the storm makes the ruling class realize just how close everything is to breaking, and must rapidly accelerate their plans. 
The plan is set in motion - beginning of world wars (China-Russia, US-Canada, EU breaking apart), release of bioweapon and maybe nuclear warfare (reference to fallout resource wars during European Collapse)
GAR-Ethiopia War
POV: Ethiopian warrior fighting the Rassuiweraars
Polish Commonwealth-Nordic Union War
POV: Fall of Stockholm
East German Invasion of Europe (East Germany calls it the War of German Unification)
POV: Fall of Hanover
European Revolution
POV: Person viewing uprising in Brussels and execution of leadership by mobs
British Civil War (continuation)
American Invasion of Canada
POV: American cannon fodder realizing they’re about to die
Argentine-Cartel War
POV: Argentine soldier during the invasion of Peru, the war is a diversion for the government to retreat to the Andeans and Antarctica
Japanese-USSR war
POV: Japanese neo-shinobi infiltrating a navy base in Vladivostok, ends with nuclear war
Chinese War of Survival 
POV: The last Chairman deciding to nuke the USSR back (yes, Savateev nuked them first)
Misc conflicts 
Syrian Water Wars
Libyan uprising
The purpose of the “world wars” are twofold: to acquire species for the biodiversity project, and to also get rid of surplus population
China is genuinely trying to survive
It dosen’t, the poor get extremely pissed
Immediate impact of solar storm 
Wildfires 
Half of Canada is on fire 
POV: Canadian resistance fighters being burnt alive
Electronics breaking down
90% of the surviving electrical infrastructure is destroyed 
POV: Australian technicians dealing with the collapse of Australia’s nuclear grid
Megadrought
No rain falls for months 
POV: MPA member fights a cartel member for water, both die of dehydration

Part 6: Nothing Beside Remains (obligatory Ozymandias reference) (Great Death)
The Great Death - struggle of humanity to survive, what happens to nations around the world there, etc. 
Spread of the bioweapon 
POV: Chinese civilian seeing his entire town die rapidly
Collapse of Asia 
POV: Japanese soldiers hearing about the Japanese home island being wiped out by Project: Eyes of Heaven
Slave uprising in GAR
POV: Slaves revolting during the building of the Saal van die Groot Leier
Heatwave in South America 
POV: The Argentine Army finally breaks into Rio De Janeiro and finds it baked to death, and the last remnant of the military government sets of their dirty nuke
Third US civil war
POV: Acting President Williamson’s escape from Washington, DC, featuring the Cascadians, AVA and the Pilgrims
July 4th Vignette
Argentina-Australia War
POV: New Zealand soldier
Population extermination squads? 
Population extermination squads are told whatever they need to hear to get the job done: that their targets are subversives, rebels, communists/capitalists, jews, arabs, and some are even told the truth that there are too many mouths to feed and not enough food to go around. What none of them are told is that they are entirely, 100% expendable and the governments have no plans to extract them. They are meant to buy time for the actual special forces to acquire seeds, animal samples and technical materials. All of them die from the Chinese Bioweapon and/or the nukes. This is also the reason for the US Military’s Rebellion right at the end of the Great Death - a high ranking armchair general who served in Vietnam refuses to have his soldiers killed, and tells them the truth about the goal of the extermination squads. However, by this point, the exterminations are 95% complete. 
POV: Any country not covered yet
End of the World music video

Part 7: A Silent Earth (Aftermath, humanity adapts+slow recovery)
World after Great Death (I will write the opening section on the world pls), what happens to survivors and elites. Communities formed.
When the Food, Inc administration leaves after ransacking Canada, the US military leads a mutiny against the ruling class, causing the reformation of Cascadia, AVA and the Pilgrims before all being killed in the nukes. A few movements attempt to reform the US but they all fizzle out by 2035 as unprecedented famine sweeps the world
This is inspired by the fall of the Big Four in the Cyberpunk universe. 
Tiny community (less than 100 people) inside a bunker complex in Cuba, the last surviving members of the Cuban Communist Party
Deaths of major characters - KARMIC JUSTICE! 
President Jarret
Acting President Williamson
Savateev
Whoever is the leader of FulTec at this point
Leader of the GAR, strung up with his own intestines and eaten alive by starving children 


POV: Holden entering the bunker, killed by Courtney
Antarctic Resettlement Project
2027-2040: life in the bunkers
2040-2050: Examining the surface of Antarctica 
2050-2060: Resettlement projects in the mainland are prepared for
2060-2080: Expeditions into the ruined mainland. Lots of opportunity for vignettes
2086: Resettlement of New York. 
2080-2090: The USSR’s remnants make contact with the Antarctic expedition. Small survivor enclaves in the Arctic Circle and parts of the southern tip of South America + Australia are found. Wars break out between the Survivors, who have not forgotten the sins of the past and seek to enact a bloody war of revenge, and the Expeditioners, who ironically are quite peaceful and share their bounty with the survivors. Decades of living in cramped bunkers and never knowing if resettlement is even possible has created a sense of intense community and selflessness. 
2090-2100: The Survivors and Expeditioners make peace, and the various remnants of the governments start to rebuild their nations. 
2105: The Great Fire. The descendants of one of the scientists deliberately destroys the vast repository of knowledge that the scientists prepared in the 2020s gets destroyed. He does this to make sure humanity never makes the same mistake again and is forced to live within nature’s bounds. Humanity never recovers. 
2100-2110: The new societies start to forget their past sins and become more hedonistic, however they can never get too lazy as the amount of minerals left and the small amount of arable land keeps humanity very small (probably 1 million at most) 
2122: The Flash Forward takes place here. Rodger Richard Holden, a descendant of Richard Holden, is the only one with access to the truth, having read his grandfather’s diary several hundred times over. 

Epilogue: The Black Ages (3000AD)
The world in 3000 AD - new date system is years after GD (e.g. 3000 is roughly 1000 in new calendar). Summary on what things are like. World is in medieval state, there are a lot less people due to there being less food. Technological development would be stunted due to heavy resource extraction. They would likely never get to the industrial revolution on a large scale as most fossil fuels are extracted out. Probably a good thing.
Lots of opportunities to wax philosophical here. Talk about how nature and God are now viewed, etc. 
- How Nature is viewed
How God is viewed
What cultures still exist
How the past is seen by the 3 literate people who still exist
Maybe touch on religions?
In the Year 3000, scavengers routinely go through garbage dumps to salvage precious metals, with archaeologists trying to recreate what history is using cultural products and books
Map of the world in 3000 AD showing what ethnic, religious and language groups survived
Yoosa - USA survivors in Greenland
The Most Serene Republic of Aleyeska - members of Operation: Eagle’s Nest that rebelled
The Duchy of Sweden - Protectorate of Norway
The Kingdom of Norway - Nordic Union collapsed at some point and Norway becomes BIGGGG
High Germany - Mostly the remains of France and Germany
Slavic Union - Various bits of the Balkans, East Europe and Russia
Siberian Empire - The rest of Russia, reaching into China and lower asia
Irish Isles - 



Obituaries (head to “Notes on Nations” section)

Misc. Narrative Ideas
A CIA agent embedded in the European Federation investigating FulTec for Food, Inc and accidentally eating their [Redacted] Bars 
Prisoners being transferred to work in a Food, Inc factory

Interlude: An Island in Chains (UK chapter)
1970s-80s - mass prosperity, Conservative government, Thatcherism, deindustrialisation. Many strikes force coal mine closures to not happen?
1990s - Labour dominance (OTL 80s style), opposition weak and shattered. Left-wing reforms like Atlee, anti-immigration stance
Rise of BNP and far-right in Britain, like EU. Takes longer to stamp out, usually using some not-very-democratic methods 
2000s - Labour threatened by Greens, LibCons, BNP. Can’t stamp them out fully due to infighting between 50 bajilion factions (New Labour, Old Labour, Reborn Syndicalists, Small but absurdly vocal Communist faction that’s eventually told to GTFO by everyone else)
Flooding in London, how it copes with it
What do they do with Ireland? I haven't decided just yet but writing the Troubles would be interesting. I think they would be reliant on UK/Europe for food and turn into a puppet.
(Probably a puppet but the IRA either keeps resisting out of a desire to stick it up to the British, or breaks apart into Pro-Dublin and Anti-Dublin factions that then begin fighting. In either case, maybe have an IRA attack destroy arable farmland, I dunno, poisoning water with weedkiller or something like that?) When anyone else writes a comment, kindly don’t use blue highlight as I use it so ppl know it’s me. About the comment, I think it seems likely for the IRA to do. They definitely would be very prominent ITTL. They probably would be fighting against the British dominance mainly.

Word count tracker (for fun): 90275 total
Prelude: 348
Intro + Section 1: 348
Part 1: 3591
Release 1: 2274
Release 2: 1317
Addendum 1: 2039
Part 2-1: 9226
Section 1: 4475
Section 2: 4751
Part 2-2: 20954
Section 1: 6793
Release 1: 2149
Release 2: 4644
Section 2: 12576
Section 3: 1585
Part 2-3: 16065
Section 1: 4537
Section 2: 5569
Section 3: 5929
Part 3: 21434
Section 1: 6172
Section 2: 6168
Section 3: 9094
Poland Interlude: 5276
Interlude (Central and South America): 11342

Note: Bold is for very major events, such as Shanghai Accords, nuclear war, Ration Omega etc. Non-bold is for less important ones, e.g. buildup to Sinai War

Glorious Decades (pre-1988)
December 8, 1941 - Ivan Voronin is born
July 28, 1953 - South Korea places tariffs on Japan
May 29, 1954 - Richard Shelby Holden is born
October 7, 1958 - Prince Moulay Hassan of Morocco is killed when his plane is shot down during the 1958 Rif Riots
November 8, 1960 [POINT OF DIVERGENCE]: Pharmacologist Frances Oldham Kelsey, a reviewer of new drug applications for the US Food and Drug Administration, is severely injured in a car accident. Although she eventually recovers after a couple of months, it is too late for her to stop the approval of thalidomide in the United States in December 1960.
February 26, 1961 - Prince Moulay Abdullah becomes king of Morocco
March 1961: Having received FDA approval the previous year, thalidomide hits the US market.
April 4, 1961 - Abdullah I makes Morocco a constitutional monarchy based off the UK
July 21, 1961: Gus Grissom travels into space. The mission goes perfectly, and the hatch of the Liberty Bell does not open during splashdown.
November 1961: Thalidomide is pulled from distribution after it is linked to birth defects.
May 9, 1962: Submitted after a series of delays, the oral contraceptive pill fails to gain FDA approval in the wake of the thalidomide scandal.
June 1963 - Syria begins allying with the USA
Early 1964: RCA buys the patents for an optical disc recording technology developed by David Paul Gregg and James Russell. Further work begins in collaboration with Philips.
February 26, 1964: American astronaut John Glenn dies at the age of 42 after hitting his head against a bathtub.
December 3, 1964 - Trade unions are outlawed in South Korea
March 1965 - The March Uprising succeeds, starting the Bahraini Civil War
June 19, 1965 - Houari Boumédiène decides to not stage his coup
January 27, 1967: The Apollo One fire occurs. Astronauts Grissom, White and Chaffee are injured, but survive.
March 31, 1967 - Construction on the future capital of the UAE begins 
July 23rd, 1967 - Holden Terminals is founded
October 1967 - The Moroccan Phosphate Boom starts
October 10, 1967 - The Popular Front, a Maoist militia group in the Bahraini Civil War, is formed
April 29, 1968 - Lockheed and Douglas merge
August 3, 1968 - The Blood Tide Massacre, a US-perpetrated War Crime, occurs in Cambodia
January 22, 1969 - Leonid Brehznev is assassinated
March 2, 1969 - President Nixon authorizes the sale of $5 million USD worth of weapons to the NUC in the Bahraini Civil War
March 28, 1969 - Following Nixon’s lead, the UK donates WW1 rifles to the NUC
May, 1969 - Syria holds its first elections 
June 1, 1969 - A truce is signed by the NUC and Arab Nationalists 
June 8, 1969 - To prevent a cult of personality like Mao or Stalin, the Soviet Union adopts the Triumvirate System
June 9, 1969 - Anton Agassi becomes General Secretary of the USSR
June 29, 1969 - The last Bahraini holdout is wiped out
1969 - 1970 - The Soviet Union reorganizes their economy, government and industry
July 19, 1969: Senator Ted Kennedy and Mary Jo Kopechne are both killed in a car accident at Chappaquiddick.
July 20, 1969: Gus Grissom is the first man to land on the Moon. The Bahraini Civil War is officially ended
August 1969 - The USA sends troops to Lebanon
September 1969 - North Yemen stops receiving aid from other nations
1970 - CO2 concentration is at avg. 324ppm. Hippie counter culture is wiped out by the combined efforts of Richard Nixon and J. Edgar Hoover. The average age of members of the Politburo is reduced to 49
January 1970 - The USA sends even more troops to Lebanon
February 1970 - The last PLO members in Lebanon are pacified
August 19, 1970 - The first elections in Bahrain are held
August 24, 1970 - Hassan al-Mutairi wins the first elections in Bahrain
September 30, 1970: After 6 years of collaboration, RCA and Philips release the LaserDisc - an optical disc format for home video for consumers and data storage for computers. Variants at launch include LD-A/V (home video), LD-ROM (data storage), and LD-WORM (write once, read many). While it plays second fiddle to MagTape in the home video market - it absolutely dominates the home computer market for data storage in the future Glorious Decades.
October 10, 1970 - The People’s Party of Bahrain is formed
January 1, 1971 - Agassi dedicates this year to modernizing the USSR. This would mean that the USSR supports leftists movements less and stops being so involved in Vietnam
February 10, 1971 - As a result of Agassi’s policies, a minor revolt occurs in the Turkish SSRs but are all crushed by the summer
June 1971 - The Main Task is far more successful in East Germany
July 14, 1971 - Relations between West Germany and the USSR begin to warm up
September 11, 1971 - Chairman Mao is successfully assassinated by Chen Qiang
October 5, 1971 - An escaped high-ranking Chinese official tells the Politburo how Chen Qiang plans to betray the working class of China
October 12, 1971-January 1, 1975 - The Soviet Union creates the “Monsoon Protocol”, helping educated Chinese communists escape from Chen’s China
Winter 1971 - Border skirmishes along the China-USSR border lead to over 2000 casualties
January 23, 1972 - The KGB deduces that an agent of the PRC assassinated Brezhnev. This would cause the second Sino-Soviet Split, and both nations would enter a hostile relationship until a brief detente in the mid 80s. 
February 22, 1972 - Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani’s coup fails
February 28, 1972 - After months of negotiation, Shanghai Accords are finally signed by the U.S. and China, changing the world and the timeline forever
March, 1972 - Nixon begins pressuring Assad to hold more free elections
March 1, 1972 - Tunisia severs ties with China
March 15, 1972 - the Boeing 2707 is unveiled for the first time
April 1972 - The USSR and China both try to gain influence in Somalia
April 13, 1972: President Nixon is injured in an assassination attempt during a state visit to Canada. The gunman, later identified as Arthur Herman Bremer, is arrested at the scene. While Herman is not associated with any radical political groups, the FBI, under Hoover's direction, nonetheless uses the incident as an excuse to further clamp down on dissidents.
April 16, 1972 - The USSR, with the help of Chinese exiles, begins widespread industrial programs and public works programs. New factories are built to covertly manufacture weapons for a war with China
June 1972: Building off the successful LaserDisc format - RCA and Philips release the videocassette format MagTape to consumers. It has the ability to record television programs at a set time, record home movies, and playback pre-recorded tapes with films on it. Thanks to the economic prosperity brought about by the Shanghai Accords - MagTape is a runaway commercial success that quickly redefines how people watch television and movies.
July 28, 1972 - The first People’s University is opened in Moscow, allowing farmers to learn an education and creating a massive service industry
September 3, 1972 - Lake Baikal is drained for irrigation 
October 8th, 1972 - The Tehran Accords (1972) - signed after the Shanghai Accords earlier in the same year - this was a peace treaty between the United States, Egypt, Israel and Iran. It basically involved the Arab world monopolizing the oil industry, with guarantees that other producers cannot undercut them. In exchange, Israel got to keep the Sinai. To guarantee Israel’s safety - American unconditional funding into Israel would go into overdrive (OTL’s post-Cold War levels) while an unconditional security agreement would be penned with the State of Israel and the Imperial State of Iran - guaranteeing both would respond if either was attacked. Bahrain is also recognized as independent by Iran. The members of the PLO are forced to leave Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and Iran, settling in Iraq and Egypt. 
November 7, 1972 - Richard Nixon wins the presidential election in a colossal landslide winning all states but D.C. Republicans make major gains in Congress.
November 9, 1972 - The first Worker’s Palace is started outside Riga, Latvian SSR
December 31, 1972 - The United Arab Emirates becomes the richest Arab nation at the time
February 6, 1973 - The Zakat Party proposes turning Morocco into a welfare state
February 12, 1973 - Hoxha is assassinated and his successor is very close to Chairman Chen. 
March 18, 1973 - The Competitive Building Act is passed, making it so that buildings made after 1970 cannot legally be maintained/restored beyond human safety concerns, unless they are a notable historical building (and it’s honestly quite easy to get a building on this list). This is meant to help facilitate competition and cause more buildings to be built
March 20, 1973 - Romania opens talks with China
Spring 1973 - The Democracy movement in Thailand succeeds
April 6, 1973 - The First Royal Kuwaiti Poetry Symposium is held
Summer 1973 - The USSR engineers ethnic tensions in Czechoslovakia to prevent another Prague Spring
July 1973 - The DDR drifts away from both China and the USSR, though remains in the Warsaw Pact for security purposes. The DDR would embrace their heritage as the birthplace of Marx and develop their own specific brand of Marxism
July 10, 1973 - The President of North Yemen is killed in a coup
August 10, 1973 - Chiang Kai-Shek is assassinated 
September 30, 1973 - Egypt restores diplomatic ties with Syria
November 9, 1973 - A group of Maoist loyalists escape to North Vietnam
December 3, 1973 - A UN Peacekeeping operation is started to disarm US bombs in Laos
December 31, 1973 - The Almeria-Beni Saf Pipeline is opened in Algeria. Deadline given by the Sultan of Oman for rebels to lay down their arms and surrender
April 1974 - East Germany begins a detente with West Germany in an attempt to woo them over to their version of Marxism
April 2, 1974 - The last rebels in Oman are killed
May 13, 1974 - China founds the World Prosperity Alliance
June 23, 1974: The Soviet Union makes its first landing on the Moon.
July 20, 1974 - Djibouti is granted to Somalia
Summer 1974 - 90% of China is owned by the State again. The USSR stops accepting educated refugees from China
November 5, 1974 - Republicans massively overperform and retake the House and the Senate in midterms
December 14, 1974 - Anti-Communist and Anti-American Protests erupt in South Korea 
1974 - Hanoi agreement promises a gradual end to the Vietnam War, which officially ends in 1975
January 7, 1975 - The Caligari-Annaba Pipeline opens in Algeria
March 23, 1975 - Australia is the first country to legalize birth control pre-1988
March 31, 1975 - The Washington-Moscow Treaty is signed in secret, though the USA would never honor it
April 1, 1975 - The Vietnam War officially ends
May 21, 1975 - Bahrain severs diplomatic ties with China
Summer 1975 - Minor famine in China
July 30 - August 1, 1975 - The Helsinki Accords are signed
August 24, 1975 - Hassan al-Mutairi is re-elected
October 14, 1975 - The USSR ratifies their fourth constitution, and recognizes the Chinese Exiles as the sole legal government of China
October 18, 1975 - China builds a SIZ in Albania
October 30, 1975 - Mauritania, instead of invading Western Sahara, starts surveying the Saharan desert for minerals to sell to China
November 1, 1975 - The Qatar “Banana Farm” opens
December 9, 1975 - East Germany and West Germany sign a trade deal, preventing the 1977 Coffee Crisis from happening
1975 - Nixon creates the “Two-Hands” policy of playing China and the USSR off each other
Early 1976 - The USSR began to allow free passage of Jews to Israel as a sign of decreased tensions between the USA and USSR
June 1976 - Lebanon’s government lifts many of its emergency restrictions, paving the way for a true democracy
July 4, 1976: The United States celebrates its bicentennial. The first manned lunar outpost is established.
July 5, 1976 - The Soviet Union begins shifting focus on preparing for a hypothetical space war. This program is called “Tunguska Protocol”
July 7, 1976: First Lady Pat Nixon passes away from a sudden stroke at the age of 64.
November 2, 1976 - Winston Morgan wins US presidential election
November 6, 1976 - The UN Peacekeeping operation finishes cleaning up undetonated US bombs in Laos
December 3, 1976 - Albania begins opening up trade with the West
December 6, 1976 - A United Nations investigation into human rights violations in China results in a massive fine and a slap on the wrist
January 20, 1977 - Winston Morgan is inaugurated. Chairman Chen Qiang attends the ceremony
March 4, 1977 - Romania is hit by an earthquake. The USA sends aid
April 10, 1977 - The Dubai Pact is signed, ending hostilities between Somalia and Ethiopia and setting up several trade agreements with them
June 14, 1977 - The Al Noor Al-Kamil Museum is opened in Umm Al Quwain, UAE
Mid 1977 - The USSR builds enough nukes to rival the United States, and the two countries make an unspoken agreement to stop bloating their militaries
October 4, 1977 - Mount Qatari is finished
October 10, 1977 - The dictator of North Yemen is killed in a coup
October 19, 1977 - President Morgan and Secretary Agassi meet in Bonn, West Germany and spend a day together. They renew their wishes for decreased tensions between their countries
December 7, 1977 - Aleks Grigorev becomes the new Minister of Defense in the USSR
Early 1978 - The USSR begins slowly opening up their economy
February 5, 1978 - The USSR secretly tests space-based weaponry
April 23, 1978 - China builds a SIZ in Romania
April 28, 1978 - Syria signs a defense treaty with the USA against Iraq
May 2, 1978 - The Guri Dam is finished in Venezuela, the largest hydroelectric dam built before the TMI incident 
May 28, 1978 - The Horn United Football Team is formed, being a pan-Somali football team that is jointly shared by Ethiopia and Somalia
August 8, 1978 - Federal Minimum wage is repealed by the Morgan Administration, though some left-leaning states keep it
August 9, 1978 - In response to the treaty made between the USA and Syria, the USSR and Iraq sign a similar deal
August 22, 1978 - The Sheikh of Fujairah completes his report on the possible long term effects fossil fuels have on the environment. He quickly destroys the report. 
November 7, 1978 - Democrats narrowly retake Senate but not House
December 1st, 1978 - Ruhollah Khomeini is assassinated in Paris
January 24, 1979 - Pol Pot is removed from power in a peaceful revolution 
February 11, 1979 - Lebanon is renamed to the Zakat Republic of Lebanon
February 21, 1979 - Sweeney Communications is founded by Frederick Sweeney
March 21, 1979 - The Trans-Mediterranean Pipeline is completed
March 25, 1979 - Kuwait becomes a constitutional monarchy
March 28, 1979 - The Three Mile Island accident occurs. The world, encouraged by Big Oil, moves away from nuclear energy. Dauphin County is evacuated
May 28, 1979 - J. Edgar Hoover dies. He is celebrated as a champion of McCarthyism. 
August 14, 1979 - After much pestering from other Arab states, Somalia is renamed to the Somali Zakat Republic
October 31, 1979 - The Soviet Union does not invade Afghanistan, instead they only train communist rebels. Afghanistan becomes a proxy war between the USA and USSR during the 80s, much like Vietnam
November 11, 1979 - The Tangier International Resort, Morocco’s largest tourist attraction, opens
December 11, 1979 - UAE joins the Trillion Dollar Club, with their GDP surpassing 1 Trillion USD
April 4, 1980 - Japan safely decommissions all of their nuclear reactors 
April 24, 1980 - Philadelphia is Pennsylvania’s Capitol as Harrisburg is considered too radioactive to inhabit
Summer 1980 - Evidence of coral bleaching is found off the coast of Australia
June 10, 1980 - Bulgaria sends troops to Afghanistan to help the communists 
July 9, 1980 - East Germany sends troops to Afghanistan
June 24, 1980 - UK Parliament passes the Nuclear Accountability and Energy Protection Acts, ensuring coal is the dominant energy source in the UK for the next two decades
July 19 - August 3, 1980 - The Soviet Union hosts the Summer Olympics in Moscow. The United States attends. 
July 22, 1980 - Oman is renamed to the Zakat Sultanate of Oman
August 1, 1980 - The World’s Largest Chair is completed in Qatar
August 10, 1980 - Agassi and Morgan sign a landmark trade deal between their two nations, and the Soviet Union begins exporting cultural products
August 24, 1980 - Hassan al-Mutairi is re-elected
Fall 1980 - The USSR begins prototyping free trade in an experiment between Finland and the Estonian SSR
September 15, 1980 - Somalia joins the World Prosperity Alliance, severing ties with the USSR
October 1980 - China starts renting out docks in Mogadishu
November 4, 1980 - Winston Morgan wins reelection to US presidency, Republicans retake Senate for rest of 80s
Winter 1980 - The USSR begins designing their space base
December 12, 1980 - Martial Law is declared in South Korea
December 15, 1980 - Libya signs the Tehran Accords
December 16, 1980 - The Morgan administration passes tax incentives to move away from nuclear power
Early 1981 - As Czechoslovakia exports huge amounts of cultural products, the ethnic tensions briefly die down
January 18, 1981 - UAE is renamed to the United Zakat Emirates
February 11, 1981 - A palace made entirely of gold is constructed in the UZE
March 1981 - Droughts in Mauritania cause a massive demographic shift to the coast
Mid 1981 - Hungary adopts a mixed economy
August 1, 1981 - Romania signs a trade deal with Turkiye
September 10, 1981 - The Morgan administration passes tax cuts for Coal and Oil-based energy grids
October 4, 1981 - King Abdullah I dies of cancer. His son, Prince Moulay Hicham, becomes king
October 9, 1981 - Tunisia finally signs the Shanghai Accords
October 10, 1981 - North Yemen starts negotiating with China for aid
December 14, 1981-April 27, 1982 - The USSR secretly buys trillions of rubles worth of imported western military hardware for their secret space program
December 31, 1981 - The USSR begins subsidizing programs to upgrade and modernize their factories using western technology
January 4, 1982 - The PLO moves their headquarters to Egypt
January 7, 1982 - China begins investing in North Yemen
January 28, 1982 - The USSR begins sending boatloads of aid to South Yemen and militarizing their border
February 20, 1982 - Karim Belhadj becomes President of Algeria. He is openly socialist and creates an Arab welfare state (Zakat Republic) 
March 11, 1982 - Bahrain is renamed to the Zakat State of Bahrain
April 17, 1982 - Algeria joins the League for Arab Prosperity
April 23, 1982 - King Hicham I officially renames Morocco into a Zakat Republic
Spring 1982 - Romania’s service industry takes off, causing a massive increase to the standard of living
May 1, 1982 - Secretary Agassi resigns
May 3, 1982 - Minister Grigorev is impeached and removed from office
May 4, 1982 - Director Andropov is found dead in his office
May 6, 1982 - The Third Triumvirate is formed with Gennady Yanayev becoming General Secretary of the USSR
June 1, 1982 - Mauritania almost gets into a war with Senegal over fishing rights
Summer 1982 - Bulgaria starts working their ethnic turks to death
June 19, 1982 - Chairman Chen proposes the Station of International Cooperation and Friendship as a way of rebuilding ties between the USSR and China 
July 7, 1982 - The Perfumed City is built in UZE
August 13, 1982 - The Soviet Union builds their first Megafactory in the Turkmen SSR
August 22, 1982 - Hicham I proposes several programs aimed at expanding women’s rights, causing a schism in the ruling Zakat Party 
September 1, 1982 - To prevent a civil war, Hicham I steps down as head of state and makes the monarchy purely symbolic
September 2, 1982 - Public parks in New York City, such as Central Park, are auctioned off to land developers
Fall 1982 - The Ughyrs are worked to death by this time
November 1982 - Romania adopts a natalist policy similar to Chairman Chen’s
December 1, 1982 - Tariq Benhassan becomes President of Morocco in a landslide
Early 1983 - South Korea and North Korea begin talks about reunifying, mediated by Chairman Chen and President Morgan
January 1983 - Mount Qatari falls apart
February 2, 1983 - Tunisia is officially renamed to the Zakat Republic of Tunisia
February 18, 1983 - Benhassen creates several policies aimed at increasing education
March 1983 - China starts building factories (but not SIZ) on the coast of Somalia
March 3, 1983 - Algeria is officially renamed to the Zakat Republic of Algeria
April 18, 1983 - Kuwait is officially renamed to the Zakat State of Kuwait
April - June 1983 - President Belhadj organizes the “Oath of Brotherhood” religious conventions
May 26, 1983 - Pinnacle Tower begins construction
Mid 1983 - Barrier free travel is introduced in the USSR
June 6, 1983 - Western Sahara is granted full autonomy by Morocco. 
July 23, 1983 - Dietmar Voss founds FulTec in West Germany
August 10, 1983 - The Soviet Union adopts its fifth constitution and begins opening up their economy even more
August 23, 1983 - The Belhadj Memorial Museum for Islamic Artwork opens
September 1983 - A small uprising of Orthodox Christians in the Baltic SSRs and Muslims in the Central Asian SSRs cause the KGB to ban the import of religious texts for a year
September 14, 1983 - A massive concert is held in Moscow, it attracts almost 2 million people from all over the world
September 1983 - Fish begin being reported extinct off the coast of Mauritania
October 1983 - The Azerbaijani SSR becomes rich selling their energy to Europe
December 1, 1983 - East Germany begins sending convicts to work in factories much like how China does
December 3, 1983 - A portrait of Chen Qiang is in every room in China
January 1, 1984 - Finland submits an application to the EU
January 20, 1984 - As a result of the Oath of Brotherhood meetings, the Algerian Holy Parliament is created
February 24, 1984 - Bahrain joins COMECON
Summer, 1984 - CO2 concentration is at avg. 360ppm
June 14, 1984 - Ould Daddah starts forcibly relocating ethnic minorities and makes them work iron mines
July 28 - August 12, 1984 - The Summer Olympics are held in Los Angeles, and the USSR attends
August 1984 - Gaddafi begins a project to expand the Great Manmade River Project
October 17, 1984 - A terrorist attack targets the irrigation pipeline draining the Aral Sea
November 6, 1984 - Franklin King wins US presidential election
Q3 1984 - European and American companies start building factories all over the USSR
Q4 1984 - Borscht is added to the menu of McDonald’s
Q1 1985 - The Tajik SSR becomes rich from manufacturing Soviet clothes which are then sold to the West
Jan 1985 - The Literacy Rate in China falls to 7.5%
February 6, 1985 - Libya signs the Shanghai Accords
February 20, 1985 - The Noor Cinema Festival is held in Algiers
April 2, 1985 - The largest statue of Nasser is completed and is located in Libya
April 4, 1985 - The Arab Grand Prix is held in the UZE and the Strait of Hormuz is jumped 
April 8, 1985 - Massive resettlement programs are conducted in Mauritania
April 17, 1985 - The capital city of the UZE is finished, followed by an opening ceremony and a massive festival lasting a week. The ten largest buildings in the world are all located here. 
April 24, 1985 - The opening festival of Haya is over
May 17, 1985 - The leader of North Yemen is assassinated and replaced by a pro-China leader
August 24, 1985 - Hassan al-Mutairi is re-elected
August 27, 1985 - The Concord of Moscow is signed, which is essentially the USSR’s version of the Shanghai Accords
Early 1986 - The Soviet Union builds so many factories that they run out of workers, and creates a program to import workers from the Warsaw Pact states
February 26, 1986 - Australia outlaws Chlorofluorocarbons
July 1, 1986 - Klaus Riedel starts working at FulTec
August 10, 1986 - Libya becomes a Zakat state
Fall 1986 - Czechoslovakia is completely financially independent from the USSR
1987 - Anti-Azerbaijani race riots happen throughout the Armenian SSR
February 14, 1987 - The Noor Cinema Festival is held again at Algiers
February 26, 1987 - The first and only McDonald's opens in the USSR
March 29, 1987 - Syria is renamed to the Zakat Republic of Syria
April 1987 - A small uprising occurs in the Estonian SSR
April 6, 1987 - The Nile Runs Red premiers in Kuwait City
May 16, 1987 - The Station for International Cooperation and Friendship is launched
Late May, 1987- Martial Law is renewed in Taiwan
June, 1987 - 90% of Mauritania’s population is located within 5 miles of the coastline
June 8, 1987 - Pinnacle Tower finishes construction
July 7, 1987 - North and South Vietnam are formally reunited in a ceremony overseen by President Richard Nixon, President King and Chairman Chen Qiang
Summer 1987 - Mining operations have corrupted much of the land in Albania
September 29, 1987 - The Marsala-Tunis Pipeline is completed
October 1, 1987 - China’s economy surpasses the United States, worth 4.87 Trillion USD
December 12, 1987 - An underwater football stadium is built off the coast of the UZE
January 21, 1988 - Truth and reconciliation efforts begin in Cambodia
February 1988 - Sinai Crisis - Egypt’s new government begins threatening Israel to give back the Sinai desert and begins formation of a new coalition of Arab states. Qatar’s government starts to plot a coup against the Emir
March 1988 - 95% of the Kazakh SSR is uninhabitable 
Q1 - 1988 - The economy of the USSR is worth 4.02 Trillion USD
April 20, 1988 - Algeria offers to mediate between Israel and Egypt
April 25, 1988 - East Germany fully pays off their foreign debts
May 13, 1988 - Egypt issues final demands to Israel to return Sinai desert, lest it and an Arab coalition (formed earlier that month) declare war
May 14, 1988 - Israel refuses Egypt’s demands, war seems inevitable
May 15, 1988 - A coalition of Arab states declare war on Israel following its refusal of Egyptian demands, beginning the Sinai War. A blockade is formed in the Mediterranean around Israel, and in the Persian Gulf against Iran
May 16, 1988 - After Syria joins the Egyptian Coalition, the USA severs diplomatic ties with the nation
May 17, 1988 - Syria is kicked out of the Alliance of Industrial Nations
June 1, 1988 - Kuwait places sanctions on Israel, violating the Tehran Accords
June 2, 1988 - The UZE places sanctions on Israel, violating the Tehran Accords
June 6, 1988 - Qatar is plunged into civil war
June 8, 1988 - Iraq launches retaliatory nuclear strikes on Iranian oil fields. A single rocket is accidentally launched at Tel Aviv. Following the strike, Israel launches nuclear weapons at Saudi and Iraqi oil fields and cities. Minister Petrov resigns from the Triumvirate. Damascus is destroyed by Iran and Israel. 
June 9, 1988 - Iraq launches all its remaining nukes at sites and cities in Israel and Iran. Billions of barrels of oil are set up in flame, and with major capitals destroyed, central governments collapse overnight across the Middle East.
As day breaks, panic sets in and panic buying occurs across the west. Markets fall by double digits as people anticipate massive inflation shocks.
Following days - Economies sharply contract, inflation surges, rioting begins

Red Decade (1988-2000)
Summer 1988 - Almost a third of land in the USSR is tainted with pollution
June 10, 1988 - Ivan Voronin becomes Minister of Defense
June 11, 1988 - The USSR starts closing off their economy and cuts off aid to many nations. Kuwait declares a state of emergency
June 12, 1988 - The USSR reintroduces rationing
June 15, 1988 - The government of Lebanon nationalizes the assets of nations that were destroyed by the nukes and uses the funds to create refugee camps
June 17, 1988 - Qatifists attack the UZE, bombing Dubai
June 18, 1988 - The Sheikh of Abu Dhabi is assassinated by Qatifists
June 19, 1988 - The UZE spirals into civil war. Bahrain is attacked by Qatifists
June 20, 1988 - Pro-Egyptian Algerian Nationalists bomb pipelines going into Europe. Hordes of refugees swarm the UZE. Gaddafi closes the borders of Libya
June 21, 1988 - President Al-Mazrouei is assassinated
June 22, 1988 - Many governments and businesses leave Haya and Dubai. Foreign dignitaries are killed by hordes of Qatifist militants. 
June 23, 1988 - The Emir and President of Kuwait are assassinated by Qatifists when trying to flee to Pakistan
June 25, 1988 - Chairman al-Mutairi takes emergency powers against the Qatifists, essentially starting the second Bahraini Civil war
June 27, 1988 - President Benhassan starts his program of rationing electricity. Lebanon participates in the operation to evacuate the Saudi Crown Prince from Kharj
June 28, 1988 - The Emir of Qatar is hung from a lamppost by rebels
June 30, 1988 - The last Bahraini oil rig is disabled 
July 1988 - The USSR reimplements Brezhnev Policy, meaning that they will try to intervene in proto-communist states now
July 1, 1988 - Special Agent Augusto Fernando César thwarts a major terrorist plot in Tunis, his last mission for the UNADTF before retiring back to Brazil
July 13, 1988 - A Chinese tanker is sunk off the coast of Algeria, permanently polluting the sea with lead
July 15, 1988 - Water rationing is 	enacted in Oman
July 17, 1988 - An outbreak of Cholera spreads throughout Lebanon
July 31, 1988 - The Civil War in UZE devolves into anarchy
August 1988 - Cambodia descends into civil war
August 6, 1988 - Tunisia suspends immigration
August 8, 1988 - Pakistan stops evacuating people from the UZE
August 11, 1988 - China pulls out of North Yemen, leaving them to their fate
August 13, 1988 - Panic buying in Lebanon forces the government to implement rationing
August 15, 1988 - Qatifist militants bomb the Holy Algerian Parliament
August 28, 1988 - The last government-controlled outpost in Kuwait falls to refugees and Qatifists
August 31, 1988 - Qatifist militants overthrow the remaining Emirates in the UZE
September 1988 - The Soviet Union drains the Aral Sea for irrigation
September 1, 1988 - By this time, international trade has dropped by 1,500%. President Belhadj is impeached. 
September 2, 1988 - The Algerian Crisis begins
September 7, 1988 - Chairman al-Mutairi is assassinated by pro-Soviet communist forces
September 30, 1988 - Riots at a ration distribution center in Lebanon causes 56 deaths
October 1988 - Qatifist militants destroy mosques in Algeria
October 9, 1988 - Chairman Chen attempts to reconcile with the Soviet Union. He is rebuffed
October 11, 1988 - Rationing begins in Tunisia
October 19, 1988 - The Sultan of Oman dies of radiation poisoning and pollution
October 25, 1988 - A housing project in Beirut for Palestinian refugees is burnt down by Christian extremists 
November 8, 1988 - New Deal Democrat Eliot Graves wins US presidential election in a 1932-like landslide
November 9, 1988 - Bahrain’s capital is destroyed by Qatifists
November 13, 1988 - Qatifist violence turns Beirut into a warzone
November 16, 1988 - The Moldovan SSR attempts to join Romania but the independence movement is nipped in the bud by Junior Officer Savateev
December 7, 1988 - An earthquake devastates the Armenian SSR. The USSR attempts to reconstruct it
December 13, 1988 - Warlords start dividing up the ruins of the UZE
December 15, 1988 - A snap election in Algeria occurs, ending the Algerian crisis. 
December 27, 1988 - North Yemen is couped yet again this time by a general
December 31, 1988 - The USSR stops producing “non-essential” goods
January 1, 1989 - By this point, most stock markets only open once a week
January 3, 1989 - Karim Benyoussef, the footballer, wins the Algerian Snap Election
January 4, 1989 - The Ministry of Efficiency is created in the USSR
January 5, 1989 - General Mourad Ben Salah takes over Algeria, declaring himself dictator. Martial law is declared, rationing is implemented, and the welfare state is cut back
January 7, 1989 - The President of Lebanon is assassinated by Qatifist rebels
January 11, 1989 - Tunisia’s pipeline is shut down
January 26, 1989 - Arlette Pascal, leader of the French Communist Party, wins in a landslide during the snap election
January 28, 1989 - North Yemen attempts to invade South Yemen
February 1989 - An uprising in the Latvian SSR is put down
February 1, 1989 - Czechoslovakia peacefully splits apart
February 5, 1989 - Mauritania’s economy collapses due to tariffs on iron
February 7, 1989 - Ould Daddah is killed on live television and a coalition of business owners, landlords, mine owners and industrialists divide up the country and reinstate slavery
February 13, 1989 - Thailand enters civil war
February 26, 1989 - Martial law and a nationwide curfew is enacted in Tunisia
February 27, 1989 - C-SPAN and PBS are merged into one channel
March 1989 - Military checkpoints are set up along the border of Algeria
March 8, 1989 - Norway and Sweden begin entering talks about forming a Union, Finland and Iceland are part of the talks
March 13, 1989 - The Department of American Welfare is formed
March 25, 1989 - PASOK wins a supermajority in the Greek legislative election
March 26, 1989 - A car bomb kills Margaret Thatcher, the IRA does not take credit
Spring 1989 - The first People’s Gardens are grown in the USSR
April 9, 1989 - Bourguiba is deposed in a coup by Mourad Kassar who tries to turn Tunisia into a western style liberal democracy in an attempt to secure aid with the West
April 16, 1989 - North Yemen’s government crumbles after the failed invasion of South Yemen
May 4, 1989 - Richard Moss, leader of the UK Labour Party, becomes Prime Minister of the UK 
May 5, 1989 - The Shah is violently overthrown, with Tehran taken over by Islamic Socialists
May 7, 1989 - The government of El Salvador is ousted in a coup
May 11, 1989 - Turkiye becomes a military dictatorship 
May 14, 1989 - The Soviet Union invades Iran in the name of “peacekeeping”, forming the Iranian Soviet Republic
May 19, 1989 - Kassar flees to Libya, kickstarting the Tunisian Civil War. A bomb goes off on the border of South Yemen, giving the Secretary the excuse to completely shut off immigration
May 23, 1989 - Carl Kruspe, leader of the German Social Democrats, becomes Chancellor of West Germany
June 1989 - Western Syria is a loose confederacy of city-states
June 6, 1989 - Mongolia petitions to join the Soviet Union, but is declined
June 30, 1989 - The government of South Yemen begins repealing reforms from the early 1980s
July 8, 1989 - The Soviet Union invades Afghanistan and establishes the Afghan SSR
August 1989 - Diplomatic relations between the USA and USSR break down
August 6, 1989 - Beirut is completely destroyed 
August 12, 1989 - The plans for Outpost Two are cancelled
August 30, 1989 - Nelson Mandela is assassinated
September 19th, 1989 - Gas is priced at $10.79 a gallon
September 29, 1989 - The American Unions and Workers Act is passed
October 9th, 1989 - After tariffs are placed on South Korean goods, anti-American protests erupt in Seoul. American forces pull out of the peninsula shortly afterwards. 
October 10, 1989 - General Mourad Ben Salah creates austerity policies
October 18, 1989 - Vietnam enters its second civil war
October 20th, 1989 - North Korea invades South Korea and takes it over during the Anti-American protests
November 17, 1989 - Bulgaria descends into civil war
Early 1990 - Tariffs are placed on Chinese goods by most nations of the world
January 1990 - Turkey begins giving aid to Syrian city-states to keep them fighting each other and stemming the refugee crisis
January 1, 1990 - Libya begins evacuating the populace so that they are all located on the coast by 2000
January 7, 1990 - Soviet Envoys are sent across Europe to partake in the “Yanayev Plan” and stop their economies from immediately collapsing
January 11, 1990 - The Graves administration creates the Feeding America By America Act, which awards government contracts to start-up farming businesses
January 21, 1990 - Food, Inc is founded
January 25, 1990 - Myanmar’s dictator is overthrown by rebels
February 16, 1990 - The Holy Algerian Parliament is disbanded 
February 24, 1990 - Benhassen repeals his education program
February 25, 1990 - Yugoslavia invades Greece, Bulgaria and Albania
March 11, 1990 - El Salvador enters civil war
April 1990 - Much of the wildlife of India is extinct now. Pollution in Indian cities cause mass die-offs of monkeys and other pests
April 1, 1990 - New York City has a population of 14 million
April 19, 1990 - In Muscat, the sun is seen for the first time in almost 2 years
May 14, 1990 - The last time a rhinoceros or elephant was seen in the wild
Summer 1990 - As a result of rising temperatures due to climate change, the nuclear war and reduced aerosol emissions, as well as the ecological destruction of the superfactories, causes the “Hot Summer” - Asia and Europe are plagued by droughts and masses of forest are burned up. Famines begin across the world. From 1990 onwards, the temperature anomaly passes 1.5°C and never returns. Minor famines hit North America as well. Farms in South Yemen go under, never to be reopened
Summer 1990 - Coral reefs die-offs become noticeable
June, 1990 - The Mauritanian “Slave Wars” happen
June 16, 1990 - Algeria begins wide scale reindustrialization programs 
June 27, 1990 - A massive firestorm destroys the capital of the Turkmen SSR and the first Soviet megafactory. Somalia attempts to invade Ethiopia and gets absolutely destroyed 
July 1, 1990 - Barre is killed attempting to flee the country. Somalia falls to civil war. Djibouti proclaims independence 
August 1990 - The USSR starts clearing land in Siberia for farms
August 12, 1990 - The Fujairah enclave is formed
September 16, 1990 - General Marwan Tabet establishes the Emergency Auxiliary Regime of Lebanon
October 9, 1990 - The leader of South Yemen steps down and is replaced by his Minister for the Interior
October 24, 1990 - Sergei Savateev becomes director of the KGB
November 1990 - The government of South Yemen nationalizes the remaining businesses and starts setting up collective farms
December 1, 1990 - Tariq Benhassan is reelected
December 18, 1990 - According to the Department of Commerce, rail use in the USA peaked on this day
December 22, 1990 - Dr. Martin Kea Rutherford develops the first thin-film solar cell
December 29, 1990 - The Soviet Union finishes fortifying the Zagros mountains in Iran
January 1, 1991 - All agricultural systems in Third World Countries collapse due to lack of resources/heat/overexploitation, without fertilizers to supplement the soil 
January 20, 1991 - Sao Paulo Massacre 
January 22, 1991 - The Yugoslav Wars end with Yugoslavia fracturing into an almost permanent state of civil war
January 23, 1991 - The Nordic Council airdrops 1 million kg of packaged food above Lebanon
February 1991 - The Warsaw Pact invades Albania
February 7, 1991 - President Graves issues Executive Order 12750, a prototype “Of the People, For the People” act
February 8, 1991 - The Supreme Court rules it unconstitutional 
February 9, 1991 -  The Senate Passes the “Of The People, For The People” act, which makes corporations liable to huge fines if caught violating the law
April, 1991 - Pesticides and insecticides become too expensive to produce
May 10, 1991 - According to economic records, the last synthetic tire is made on this day
May 21, 1991 - Ethiopia annexes Djibouti
June 16, 1991 - Mongolia is taken over by China
July 4, 1991 - The King-Chevron Scandal. They are forced to pay $472 Billion in damages to the Graves Administration
July 11, 1991 - New Zealand builds their first wind farm made after 1980
September 1991 - Morocco begins turning old tourist resorts into housing for the homeless
October 25, 1991 - London’s air pollution breaks Victorian records for the first time
October 27, 1991 - Almost 3000 people die in Morocco when a hotel collapses 
November 12, 1991 - Laos is invaded by China
January 1, 1992 - By this point, over 95% of all companies across the world have gone bankrupt due to the Crash of 88 and the Shock. The “Kaleidescope” era of fashion ends. The Second Bahraini Civil War has devolved into anarchy. 
January 8, 1992 - The Moroccan town of Fez almost burns down
February 1, 1992 - King-Chevron is nationalized
February 7, 1992 - Leftist Guerillas take over Guatemala City
February 11, 1992 - The Partitions of Albania and Yugoslavia are completed
February 27, 1992 - The Boeing 808 is launched
March 1, 1992 - Dietmar Voss steps down as CEO of FulTec to be replaced by Klaus Riedel
March 2, 1992 - The Aral Sea is completely drained for irrigation 
March 10, 1992 - Siliao is launched - a tofu-based meat substitute
March 13, 1992 - The last survivors in Bahrain band together to create a series of rafts to sail to Iran
April 11, 1992 - Walt Disney dies
June 10, 1992 - Final sighting of a mole rat in the wild
July 25, 1992 - The final Olympic games are held in Beijing and end up a humanitarian disaster 
July 26, 1992 - Azerbaijani nationalists sabotage a natural gas pipeline
July 30, 1992 - Tabqa Dam is destroyed by Qatifists, flooding much of east Syria
August 1, 1992 - China invades Taiwan
August 18th, 1992 - Last sighting of a lion in the wild
Summer 1992 - Most herbivores are extinct by this time
September 26, 1992 - A permanent Red Army division is established in Dagestan to keep watch on the Caucus SSRs
November 3, 1992 - Elliot Graves wins re-election
Winter 1992 - The USSR resumes research into using nuclear energy to power military craft
December 12, 1992 - The last of the Bahraini refugees end up in Kashmir
December 31, 1992 - All European countries have banned cars by this time
January 1993 - Morocco becomes increasingly religious, with the President leading prayer on live TV
January 17, 1993 - China invades Cambodia
February 6, 1993 - Due to compounding issues, including the investigative report, China leaves the United Nations. The USSR follows suit, and by the end of the year, many nations would leave. 
February 23, 1993 - Thailand’s civil war ends
March 1, 1993 - The last shipment of over-the-counter pharmaceuticals are produced in the USA
Spring 1993 - The USSR officially pulls out of the Iranian and Afghan SSRs
April 1993 - Both Iran and Afghanistan descend into civil war
April 11, 1993 - The last shipment of Soviet aid is sent to South Yemen
May 1993 - Whales are mainly extinct by now
June 6, 1993 - Honduras invades El Salvador. Honduras consequently collapses from internal fighting. 
June 7, 1993 - Brussels Conference ends with announcement of the formation of the European Federation next year
July 10, 1993 - The National Relief - a Universal Basic Income system - is developed in the USA after Social Security collapses
August 1993 - Protests against the leader of South Yemen kick off
Fall 1993 - First reported “commuter riot” 
January 24, 1994 - The American Industry Protection Act is passed
February 3, 1994 - The Saudi Remnants invade North Yemen and turn it into a new Saudi Kingdom
February 17, 1994 - Using the Saudi invasion as an excuse, the military of South Yemen coup the secretary and kill him
March 1, 1994 - European Federation is officially formed
March 29, 1994 - Morocco attempts to join the EF
April 12, 1994 (on Tuesdays) - 1994 European federal election held - PES-Greens w. ALDE support government formed
Spring 1994 - Zebras, giraffes, leopards, whales and many other animals are considered extinct
September 19, 1994 - The last farm in Lebanon is abandoned due to how corrupted the soil is
September 26, 1994 - China invades Thailand
October 25, 1994 - Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution is officially repealed
November 30, 1994 - The last member of the Saudi Royal Family is killed in an uprising and the Saudis retreat
1995 - By this time, most of Africa, South America and the Middle East are in civil war conditions, warlordism and anarchy
January 1, 1995 - Cars are completely outlawed in the USSR
January 1995 - The last pharmacies close down as many medicines become too expensive to make
Early 1995 - Rapid urbanization has caused suburbs to “die off”. Fuel shortages have caused most automobiles to become unused and destitute. Gas prices are $13 a gallon at the lowest, with some places like Hawaii having $20 a gallon. 
March 1995 - Mauritania is divided into three main factions, based on agriculture, fishing and mining, respectively 
Spring 1995 - The European Federation passes the Anti-Monopoly and Support for Small Businesses Act
March 26, 1995 - Sweeney Communications files for bankruptcy. Frederick Sweeney becomes interested in politics. 
March 31, 1995 - China invades Vietnam
April 1995 - The New York “Commuter Wars”, a series of deadly riots in the New York metro, occur
May, 1995 - Many farms begin hiring armed guards to patrol for rodents and other vermin
June 11, 1995 - The Alliance of Nations is formed
June 13, 1995 - Tunis declares independence from the Tunisian Liberation Front
June 30, 1995 - Congress passes the Fuel Prioritization Act
July-August 1995 - The Ukrainian SSR revolts against the USSR. The rebellion quickly spirals out of control and hot fires dominate the Ukrainian and Moldovan SSRs
July 1, 1995 - Morocco joins the Alliance of Nations
July 12, 1995 - Aden is almost burned down by Somali refugees
July 17, 1995 - Algeria joins the Alliance of Nations
Summer 1995 - First major dustbowl occurs in the American Midwest
October 1995 - Finland begins a policy of strict rationing
Late 1995 - The Hungarian mixed economy collapses
December 7, 1995 - The Romania enters civil war
December 15, 1995 - Algeria and Morocco form the Pact of Gribaltar 
January 1, 1996 - The USSR begins full-scale resettlement programs for the Central Asian and Caucus SSRs
Early 1996 - The USSR begins building housing in the old tourist traps in the Baltic SSRs
February 6, 1996 - The last astronauts leave Outpost One
February 15, 1996 - The Nordic Economic Union is formed between Norway, Sweden and Finland
March 25, 1996 - In the USSR, a race riot as a result of ethnic tensions leaves over 500 dead. This would force the Politburo to adopt a policy of ethnic segregation 
Spring 1996 - Great Barrier Reef is officially dead
April 29, 1996 - Pan-Am files for bankruptcy 
Summer 1996 - Rusted cars are used as homeless shelters for the first time.
June 1996 - A massive drought in the Maghreb causes the withering states there to finally collapse
June 5, 1996 - Governor of California is assassinated for extending water rationing
July, 1996 - The Sands of Time begin waging war on Mauritanian slavers
July 1, 1996 - President Benhassen is impeached. His Prime Minister, Abdelkarim Tazi, takes over
July 31, 1996 - The Beijing Super Collider explodes
July 22, 1996 - 203 die in food riots in Casablanca, forcing Tazi to declare martial law in Morocco
July 23-August 5, 1996 - Detroit Gas Riots
August 14-September 2, 1996 - LA water riots
September 16, 1996 - North Dakota Standard Oil, an oil company in North Dakota, files for bankruptcy as it becomes too expensive to extract more oil, as a majority of the deposits have been depleted 
October 9, 1996 - Western Sahara is granted independence by Morocco
November 5, 1996 - Clifford Smith is elected President, Democrats maintain House and Senate
December 4, 1996 - China invades Myanmar
Summers 1997 and 98 - Strong El Nino years cause the “Black Summers”, in which the temperature anomaly passes 2°C and more droughts occur
January 6, 1997 - The Frente de Acción Obrera, a Spanish nationalist group, is founded in Madrid
January 21, 1997 - President Smith creates the American Automobile Resurgence Initiative
January 28, 1997 - The Great American Dust Bowl begins to form, starting in Oklahoma
February 24, 1997 - A Soviet Probe surveys the moon for oil. None is found. 
February 28, 1997 - The Bündnis für Heimat Deutschland, a West German nationalist group, is founded in Bonn
March 10, 1997 - Secretary Yanayev suffers a stroke and retires
April 25, 1997 - Constantin Rutskoy becomes General Secretary of the USSR. In actuality, he is a mouthpiece for Voronin and Savateev
Q1 1997 - China’s economy caves in
Spring, 1997 - Three separate outbreaks of Hep-C happen in the USA, due to improperly cleaned IV bags
May 1, 1997 - Elliot Graves launches the “American Hope” PAC to continue his agenda
May 2, 1997 - The Arizona National Guard is permanently activated to deal with the deteriorating environmental situation 
May 6, 1997 - The “Steamer”, a coal-dust powered automobile that is prone to exploding, is released to the US market by Ford-Chrysler
May 19, 1997 - The Destino de Portugal, a Portuguese nationalist group, is founded in Lisbon
Summer 1997 - Heatwaves, wildfires and drought all across the southwestern US causes a massive influx of domestic refugees to resettle in Denver. This would also cause power grids in the south west to collapse. Reports of Steamers exploding become more common
June 1, 1997 - In desperation, Greece and the Federation sign a trade deal, allowing European food megacorps to operate freely there. The country becomes a puppet state of the Federation in the years following, the Federation controlling elections and government policy
June 17, 1997 - Hydroelectric dams built in the Benelux region are believed to be responsible for mass famines and drought in the area in later years
June 19, 1997 - The governor of Alabama authorizes penal labor on farms
June 21, 1997 - President Smith reorganizes the Department of the Interior into the Department of the Environment
June 26, 1997 - Kim Jong-Il is beheaded on live television by the KPA
July 4, 1997 - Morocco runs out of oil
July 7, 1997 - 37 workers are hospitalized after an experiment to recycle plastic goes wrong
July 11, 1997 - The State of Alabama sues the Smith Administration 
Fall 1997 - Channel Crisis happens. UK and Federation relations are strained. 
September 20, 1997 - An investigation into Ford-Chysler finds that they rushed the production of Steamers to gain federal contracts. Ford-Chrysler is forced to pay $257 Billion in fines, becomes bankrupt, and would later be nationalized. 
September 1997 - The Ministry of Health conducts an investigation into the health conditions of Soviet citizens and discovers that severe rationing and an uneven diet led to health problems
October 1997 - PES becomes gradually more right-wing
November 13, 1997 - The Esercito del Popolo, an Italian nationalist group, is founded in Rome
November 20, 1997 - President Smith creates the National Landmark Creation and Maintenance Act
December 1997 - The coastal cities of Syria begin scavenging the Meteridianian to maintain their desalination machines
December 4, 1997 - The Warsaw Pact invades Finland, starting the Nordic War
December 5, 1997 - President Smith severs diplomatic ties with the members of the Warsaw Pact
December 31, 1997 - Toys are outlawed in the USSR
Winter 1998 - Farmer’s Bounty is made in the USSR to supplement vitamin deficiencies in rationing 
January 12, 1998 - Ford-Chrysler is nationalized and renamed to American Automobile Manufacturers
January 26, 1998 - In Alabama v. Clifford Smith, the Supreme Court rules 5-4 that corporations using penal labor to increase crop yield is not against the constitution. 
February 2, 1998 - The Select Committee on the Enforcement of Servile Rights is formed
May 24, 1998 - Congress passes the Sustainable Urban Expansion Act, which taxes land based on how arable it is. Apartments spring up overnight
June 5, 1998 - East Germany suddenly closes all land routes to West Berlin, and the USSR piles its military on the border. The city is supplied by plane in the meantime, beginning the 1998 Berlin Crisis
June 12, 1998 - The Berlin Crisis ends as the Federation and Soviet Union announce a deal to de-escalate the crisis and reopen the city
June 16, 1998 - A bomb blows up the last operational oil refinery in Tunisia
August 6, 1998 - After a massive riot in Algiers leads to 200 dead, the Algerian Civil War kicks off
August 18, 1998 - The three ruling factions of Mauritania unite into the Confederation of Sublime Mauritania 
August 20, 1998 - First Thai Uprising
August 26, 1998 - The American Workers Monument is completed in Chicago, Illinois. The President of Canada, the King of England and the Prime Minister of the UK attend. 
October 1998 - The Soviet Union starts blocking all land routes into East Germany. President Smith spearheads the negotiation efforts. 
November 3, 1998 - Race riots in Paris leave over 300 dead
November 9, 1998 - New Mexico’s National Guard is permanently activated
November 12, 1998 - Italian Parliament passes IMISA Act
December 1998 - Massive sandstorms ravage the Maghreb region
January, 1999 - The first Great Western Resettlement Project is completed. In remaining countries, with the exception of the Big Four, agricultural equipment breaks down
Spring 1999 - Due to expenses in refrigeration, and also finding out that CFCs were causing the environment to deteriorate, many companies and governments around the world begin developing non-perishable rations
March 10, 1999 - The Second Tibetan Uprising. For their folly, they are worked to death in the still-functioning Chinese Superfactories
March 13, 1999 - A massive march of over 10,000 people takes place in Rome, protesting for better working conditions for electrical workers
March 22, 1999 - European Federal Supreme Court strikes down Italy’s IMISA Act
Spring 1999 - The Caspian Sea turns to poison due to radioactive contamination and acid rain
April 1999 - The state governments of Arizona and New Mexico go bankrupt
April 1, 1999 - 1999 Seville bombing occurs - FAO kills 1 Spanish MFP and 2 MSPs
April 13, 1999 - 1999 European federal election held - same government formed, NEF overperformance. In Japan, automobiles are banned. 
May 8, 1999 - The Nixon Monument is completed in Yorba Chenda, California
Spring 1999 - The European Federation repeals the Anti-Monopoly and Support for Small Businesses Act
June 3, 1999 - Helsinki falls to the Soviet Union
June 19, 1999 - The Helsinki Treaty is signed, ending the Nordic War
July 5, 1999 - The Reeducating America Act is passed, where the government subsidizes higher education in an attempt to increase literacy rates and create a more educated workforce
July 9, 1999 - The governments of Sweden and Norway announce the formation of the Nordic Union of Sweden and Norway by the turn of the millenium
July 31, 1999 - The Tangier Border Incident happens, almost causing war between the Federation and Morocco 
Summer 1999 - A huge famine causes 20 million to die all over Eastern Europe and Western Russia
Fall 1999 - The Kazakh SSR is complete uninhabitable 
September 9, 1999 - Algiers declares independence from Algeria
September 15, 1999 - The Empire State Building shuts its lights off forever
October 1999 - Sandstorms ravage North Africa
October 13, 1999 - Former President Benhassen, taking advantage of the Algerian Civil War, launches his “revolution” and starts Morocco’s long civil war. Tazi is killed, and Hicham I is forced by gun point to reinstate President Benhassen. 
October 14, 1999 - The Socialist Republic of Morocco, a Soviet satellite state, is created
October 15, 1999 - India annexes Bangladesh 
November 1, 1999 - President Benhassen is hanged by his own men for not being atheist enough
November 6, 1999 - The United States joins the Alliance of Nations
November 21, 1999 - The Finnish SSR is established
December 1999 - El Salvador is a failed state by this point
December 31, 1999 - By this date, all books in the USSR are seized and put in communal libraries so the government can keep track of who reads

The Austere Decade (2000-2010)

2000 - China’s military passes 50 million. Most vehicles on roads are only emergency vehicles. Korea is the fastest growing economy. 99.9% of all international shipping has vanished. The last survivors in Qatar die out. The Hadhramaut region of South Yemen is completely abandoned 
Early 2000 - The USSR stops subsidizing industry in the Caucus SSRs
January 1, 2000 - The 15th Five Year Plan turns Siberia into one giant farm. The last Qatifist settlements die out in the Arabian Peninsula
January 8, 2000 - India annexes Sri Lanka
January 16, 2000 - The Reeducating America Act is amended to be lottery-based
January 24, 2000 - Nur al-Haqq begins his quest to reunite Somalia as a theocratic state
January 28, 2000 - The prototype wind-powered station is finished in Washington, DC
February 20, 2000 - The Nordic Union of Sweden and Norway is formed
February 25, 2000 - The prototype hydroelectric station is finished in Saint Paul, Minnesota
March 4, 2000 - The Algerian Civil War collapses into anarchy 
March 14, 2000 - The European Federation passes the Migration and Border Control Act, which effectively outlaws immigration
April 2000 - New York City has a population of 27 million
April-September 2000 - The Smith Administration prototypes corn-based ethanol fuel 
April 11, 2000 - The Nordic Union votes 69-31 to join NATO
May 2, 2000 - The prototype solar station is finished in Eureka, California
June 21, 2000 - A European warship fires on a Nordic merchant vessel during a training exercise. The Nordic Union demands an explanation, and the Nordic Crisis begins
June 29, 2000 - The National Monument to American Farmers is completed outside of Lincoln, Nebraska
June 30, 2000 - The European Federation threatens to blockade the Nordic Union unless it agrees to a trade deal with them
July 4, 2000 - The prototype Geothermal power station is finished in Yellowstone, Montana
July 7, 2000 - The first Soviet nuclear power plant is opened
July 9, 2000 - All of Japan’s pre-1988 nuclear power plants are reopened 
August 14, 2000 - Mexico experiments in Solar Power. They don’t get far.
Fall 2000 - Most colleges shut down for good due to rapidly declining enrollment rates and relentless budget cuts. Food, Inc is the biggest donor of the Democratic Party and subsidizes many public services.
September 7, 2000 - The KKK and Panthers start getting into wars with each other. The South tries to secede.
September 10, 2000 - A trade deal between the Nordic Union and European Federation is signed, butchering Nordic labour laws and allowing European foodstuffs to freely expand in it. The backlash fundamentally changes Nordic politics
October 2000 - Fishing hauls start to become worryingly small
October 2, 2000 - The first report of a “Panther Maul” occurs
November 2000 - The Soviet Union begins aiding the Socialist Republic of Morocco
November 7, 2000 - Clifford Smith wins reelection
November 9, 2000 - Representative Alfred M. Keyes, the Republican Presidential Candidate, concedes defeat and vows to campaign in the Deep South in an effort to stop the racial violence
November 14, 2000 - Keyes is last seen talking down a group of Panthers in Rome, Georgia
November 16, 2000 - The newly elected governor of Illinois passes the Industrial Preservation Act which significantly limits the power of unions
November 11, 2000 - The Three Gorges Dam in China is built 
November 25, 2000 - The first reported case of “rubber rationing” 
Winter, 2000 - The United States is hit by its first major famine due to the racial violence in the Deep South
December 2000 - Many farms begin hiring armed guards not for pest control, but to keep out looters, vandals, bandits and thieves 
December 7, 2000 - Earliest reported major food riot in the world (with more than 100+ deaths) 
December 12, 2000 - AmRail is bailed out by the Food, Inc to better facilitate transport of their products
December 15, 2000 - Representative Keyes is found dead, hung by a noose and naked, outside of Charlottesville, North Carolina
December 16, 2000 - Wind power begins an experimental prototyping phase in Belgium
2001 - Food, Inc reports a net operating loss this year. Many are too poor to buy new clothes
March 14, 2001 - Following a riot in Brussels the NEF is banned under an emergency act
May 4, 2001 - Rabat is destroyed in a bombing, King Hicham I is killed 
June 5, 2001 - Turkiye is expelled from NATO
July 17, 2001 - An expedition of pilgrims attempt to go into the ruins of the UZE to collect valuable islamic artifacts 
August 12, 2001 - Gaddafi hosts a meeting of COMECON in Benghazi 
August 24, 2001 - President Smith’s Secretary of Transportation goes missing during a test drive in the Mojave desert
August 29, 2001 - The Secretary of Transportation is found dead, cooked alive in his car
October 2001 - Soviet police find almost 2000 televisions in a warehouse raid
October 8, 2001 - A prototype limousine powered by alternative energy explodes, and convinces President Smith to pull the plug on the American Automobile Resurgence Initiative
November 1, 2001 - A ration protest in Moscow leaves over 500 dead
November 16, 2001 - The American Government officially stops researching alternative energies
November 23, 2001 - The Monument to Public Service is completed
January 1, 2002 - Food, Inc yet again reports a net operating loss this year
January 13, 2002 - Religion is outlawed in the Soviet Union
February 3, 2002 - Former President Belhadj dies of lung cancer in Paris, France
March 18, 2002 - The National Memorial for Vietnam Veterans is completed
March 25, 2002 - The American Mentorship Act of 2002 is passed
Spring 2002 - Due to the sharply declining literacy rates due to most public schools shutting down, Reader start being hired to help illiterate government workers with their jobs
May 14, 2002 - Pinnacle Tower is bought by the Food, Inc, who renames it to Food, Inc Tower
May 19, 2002 - The European Federation begins aiding the Moroccan Monarchists
June 10, 2002 - Final sighting of a mole rat in the wild
July 31, 2002 - The Soviet Union joins the Alliance of Nations
August 2002 - The last survivors in Oman retreat to the mountains and join the Fujairah enclave
August 3, 2002 - At an Alliance of Nations meeting, China is accused of industrializing Africa, offsetting all the hard work that the US, EU and USSR have done to curb emissions
August 23, 2002 - Food, Inc and Fultec sign the London Agreement of 2002, limiting the corporations to their own spheres of influence
August 27, 2002 - Libya joins the Alliance of Nations
September 1, 2002 - Representative Sweeney’s amendment to the “Of the People, For the People” Act is passed
September 17-23, 2002 - India and Pakistan destroy each other in nuclear war
September 24, 2002 - Nouakchott is destroyed in a bombing by the Sands of Time
October 2002 - Over 130,000 people would be arrested in Chicago. Pakistani refugees start fleeing to the ruins of Afghanistan, Iran and some eventually end up in Kuwait
October 2, 2002 - When protesters siege Chicago’s City Hall, the Mayor of Chicago is killed in the violence
October 3, 2002 - Martial law is declared in Chicago, with National Guard troops called in to maintain order
November 2002 - The Midterms result in a huge amount of Democrats becoming corporatists. In the aftermath of the “Of the People, For the People” Act of 2002, government corruption begins to run rampant 
November 29, 2002 - The President of Tunis is assassinated by pro-Kassar operatives
December 11, 2002 - China completes the Ertan dam
December 17, 2002 - The Libyan Revolution happens, kicking off their civil war. The President-In-Exile is killed in the fighting
January, 2003 - Blackouts in Japan cause several nuclear power plants to be evacuated for fear of meltdowns
February 2, 2003 - After a meeting with the Governors of New Mexico and Arizona, President Smith creates the policy of National Triage
April 16, 2003 - Chairman Chen Qiang dies of a heart attack, ashamed with the damage he has done to his country
May 30, 2003 - Phoenix, Arizona is declared “unsustainable” by the Smith administration
Summer 2003 - The “Red Summer” begins in Europe, leading to a new crime wave and a resurgence of previously banned extremist groups. The EF and USSR stop supporting Morocco
June 10, 2003 - South Yemen collapses into civil war
June 21, 2003 - FulTec pulls out lots of its operations in foreign countries and suspends most water exports
July 1, 2003 - The Nordic Union suspends all provisions of it’s trade agreement with the European Federation
July 3, 2003 - A group of Neo-Crusaders destroy the remnants of the Lebanese government in Tripoli and burn the city down
July 17, 2003 - The 2003 general strike begins in the European Federation
July 20, 2003 - The ECL party is banned due to their “revolution” speech a few days prior
July 23, 2003 - The military coups the Greek government following hyperinflation and economic collapse induced by the Red Summer
July 26, 2003 - The Libyan Civil War has become a stalemate, forming two proto-states
July 29, 2003 - The “March on Seville” occurs and the EEL is formed in Andalusia. The Federation declares war on it
August 1, 2003 - A hostage situation off the coast of Wellington prompts the New Zealand and Australian military to adopt a “shoot first, ask questions later” policy
August 4, 2003 - The Soviet Union and East Germany take over West Berlin
August 5, 2003 - The European Federation tries to get NATO to help them retake Berlin, but none of their allies come to their aid
August 6, 2003 - The Tajik SSR rebels and the Red Army is forced into a protracted conflict with the Tajik rebels
August 10, 2003 - The Smith Administration passes the American Clothing Act of 2003, making it much easier for Americans to get reliable clothing
August 12, 2003 - The Esercito del Popolo takes over Naples and forms the FLI
August 13, 2003 - Seeing the Tajik Revolt, the Georgian SSR launches a similar uprising but it is immediately squashed by the Red Army
August 15, 2003 - The Federation retakes Naples and crushes the FLI
August 14, 2003 - Water riots in the Uzbek SSR leave over 500 dead
August 19, 2003 - The European Federal Government decides in a five-hour long meeting to initiate the Crackdown to save the Federation
August 21, 2003 - The Crackdown occurs - protests and riots in the European Federation are forcefully crushed and dispersed and the 2003 General Strike is ended. In the following days, a slew of new laws are passed that effectively turn the Federation into an authoritarian state
August 25, 2003 - The last Monarchist holdouts in Morocco surrender, ending one stage of the Moroccan civil war. The coastal city states in Syria use the drought to expand their influence over the region
August 29, 2003 - The European Federation passes the Freedom of Information Act of 2003, severely limiting free speech
September 2003 - The ruins of Syria are attacked by Crusaders but are repelled 
September 3, 2003 - The European Federation passes the European Stability Act of 2003, forming the Local Protection Units
September 27, 2003 - The European Federation passes the Trade Union Act of 2003, effectively outlawing trade unions
October 6, 2003 - The National Monument of American Bankers, Entrepreneurs and Stockbrokers is completed
October 10, 2003 - A group of Pakistani refugees land in the ruins of Bahrain and try to live in an Oil Rig
October 14, 2003 - Several MFPs and MSPs of the Party of European Socialists leave and become “Democratic Independents” in response to the authoritarian acts of the European Federation
October 17, 2003 - The Syrian city-states band together and fortify the Jabal al-Ansariya mountain range against further incursion 
November 9, 2003 - The Federation sends Greece an “emergency aid package” to stave off the country’s collapse, in exchange for the integration of the Greek army with the European, among other promises
November 11, 2003 - Last reported sighting of a gopher in the wild
December 16, 2003 - Classified documents of Federation army integration with Greece’s are left on a bench in Athens, creating massive backlash
January 3, 2004 - Nur al-Haqq succeeds in reuniting Somalia
January 12, 2004 - The Second Greek Civil War begins following a series of KKE bombings in Athens and a takeover of much of the north-west of Greece
January 13, 2004 - The Greek far-right forms the Greek Homeland Army and takes parts of the south and north of the country
January 19, 2004 - Turkey seizes most of the Aegean Islands with little resistance
January 24, 2004 - Turkey invades Cyprus, which falls two days later
January 29, 2004 - The Federation turns Algiers into a puppet state
February 2, 2004 - Crete is fully taken over by the communists, forming the People’s Republic of Crete
March 28, 2004 - Japan opens their first nuclear power plant built since 1980, located outside of Tokyo
March 29, 2004 - Iron Tagant is overthrown in a slave revolt
April 24, 2004 - The Soviet Union introduces the “Standard Worker’s Uniform” to cut back on manufacturing costs
May 1, 2004 - Protests in Beijing against ration reductions are met with over 600 dead
May 9, 2004 - Second Thai Uprising
Summer 2004 - Most American cities are too poor to run their lights
June 26, 2004 - The Great Manmade River is destroyed by Gaddaffi Loyalists 
July 2004 - Food, Inc effectively controls the supply of fertilizer in the USA, ensuring their dominance in the food market
July 23-30, 2004 - A deadly heat wave causes massive riots to kick off due to power rationing
Fall 2004 - Hungary begins selling food to the European Federation at high prices
September 4, 2004 - Representative Sweeney submits the Labor and Work Reform Act to Congress
September 8, 2004 - The Soviet Union invades Greece as the Greek Communists are on the brink of collapse
September 24, 2004 - The Federation passes the Greek Military Assistance Act of 2004 and sends billions of Euros and many army divisions to defend the Greek Republic
September 28, 2004 - Albania falls into civil war
September 30, 2004 - The final Presidential Debate is televised
November 2, 2004 - Frederick Sweeney is elected president
November 14, 2004 - Struggling against the exponential crime rate increase, the Labor and Work Reform Act is passed, and with it is a total ban on firearms. Prisons are replaced with penal labor. Curfews are implemented in many cities. This would result in a general strike.
November 23, 2004 - President Smith drafts an executive order to attempt to nullify the Labor and Work Reform Act, but is shot down by the Supreme Court
December 14, 2004 - Food, Inc opens its first prison-labor factory in Saint Paul, Minnesota
2005 - For the first time, carbon emissions remain unchanged
2005 - Global temp. anomaly passes 3°C
2005 - Projected date that China’s land would be unable to produce food
Early 2005 - FulTec is the European Federation’s sole food supplier
January 3, 2005 - A general strike in response to the Labor and Work Reform Act is launched in the Rust Belt. President Smith would spend the remainder of his term trying to keep the country together
January 12, 2005 - Japan opens the geothermal power plant in Yanaizu-Nishiyama
January 17, 2005 - President Smith suffers a heart attack and his Vice President, Roy Sanderson, becomes Acting President for the remaining three days
January 22, 2005 - The American Unions and Workers Act of 2005 is passed, superseding the 1989 one
January 23, 2005 - A factory in Chicago is burned down with the workers inside
January 30, 2005 - President Sweeney gives his “Strikebreaker” speech
January 31, 2005 - The “Second Civil War” ends as the government stops intervening in the KKK-Panther race war
February 2005 - Belize is abandoned
February 19, 2005 - Brazil begins research into making hydroelectric power stations, however, government corruption prevents it from taking off
March 2005 - The Sweeney Administration attempts to convince the Nordic Union to stay in NATO
March 24, 2005 - The Nordic Union holds a referendum to leave NATO, which they do
March 26, 2005 - Denmark passes the LPU Security Guarantee Act, using the bureaucracy against the federal government
Spring 2005 - The newly elected anti-American ultranationalist Canadian government begins constructing a border wall on the eastern side of their country
April 1, 2005 - Boston has a population of 5 million
April 8, 2005 - First reported case of Red Flu
April 10, 2005 - Canada leaves NATO
April 21, 2005 - The last independent functioning pharmaceutical company is bought by Bethesda PharmTech
April 30, 2005 - Puerto Rico and the rest of the US’s overseas territories are declared unsustainable 
May 2005 - The UK/EU blockade occurs and fractures NATO, causing it to disband by the end of the month
May 18, 2005 - The Premier of Denmark is killed by an LPU dispatch as a response for passing the LPU Security Guarantee Act and it being declared illegitimate by the Supreme Court
May 19, 2005 - Survivors in Kuwait City begin setting up desalination machines
Summer 2005 - A massive brushfire spreads through northern Australia, burning Darwin down in the process
June 1, 2005 - Moscow becomes quarantined as the Red Flu spreads along USSR supply lines
July 2005 - The Uzbek SSR is projected to run out of arable land by this date
August 2005 - Gaddafi Loyalists and Rebels have multiple battles in the Gulf of Sidra
August 28, 2005 - The final draft for the Tokyo Mega Dam is completed
August 29, 2005 - The American South is devastated by Hurricane Wilson
August 30, 2005 - The European Federation “liberates” Morocco 
September 7, 2005 - The Federation of Morocco, a European puppet state, is formed
September 22, 2005 - Nur al-Haqq is killed in battle, the Somalian Caliphate fractures into civil war
Fall 2005 - The Minister of Health resigns
October 2005 - 99.9% of all accessible oil has been exhausted, the rest of it is in hard to reach places or is too costly to extract
November 2005 - European forces begin destroying Moroccan art
Winter 2005 - The Kyrgyz SSR is abandoned by Moscow
December 31, 2005 - Pursuant to the Labor and Work Reform Act of 2004, all privately owned firearms are to be collected by the government by this date
January 1, 2006 - Carbon emissions dropped slightly. CO2 concentration is just below 550ppm avg. Thousands upon thousands of species are extinct. Forest fires are regular events across the world, and storms have become catastrophic. 
January 26, 2006 - In a 5-4 Supreme Court case, domicile servitude is legalized 
February 6, 2006 - Former President Smith recovers from his coma
February 10, 2006 - Former Presidents Graves and Smith leave the Democratic Party and form the Sustainability and Welfare Party, commonly known as the Green Party
February 14, 2006 - The CCP creates the One Child Policy
February 26, 2006 - LA is declared “unsustainable” by the Sweeney Administration
February 27-28, 2006 - The Green Party organizes the evacuation of LA. It ends up being a humanitarian disaster, with the CEO of Pacifica Shipping dying in a steamer explosion
March 16, 2006 - After invading the Aegean Islands and Cyprus, Turkiye is stretched too thin and collapses into civil war
March 26, 2006 - Pacifica Shipping files for bankruptcy 
Spring 2006 - Tokyo’s Population surpasses 44 million
April 2006 - Turkish refugees flood the Syrian city-states
April 13, 2006 - South Africa is officially reorganized into the Groot Afrikaanse Republiek
May 5, 2006 - A massive hurricane, Hurricane Whittney, drenches New York in floods
May 20, 2006 - The Syrian city-states united into the Wadi League
June 3, 2006 - Czechia attempts to join the European Federation and is kicked out of the Warsaw Pact by the USSR. This would set a precedent and the Warsaw Pact would unravel by the end of the year
July 12, 2006 - The Bowling Green Textiles Company buys the last functioning textile mills, creating a monopoly on clothing and textiles in the USA
July 19, 2006 - The European Parliament passes the State and Local Governance Act of 2006, making states ceremonial and giving all power to the Federal Government 
August 25, 2006 - The last public transportation in the USA, a bus line in Washington, DC, is finally shut down
Fall 2006 - The last natural vegetation in mainland China is eaten
September 17, 2006 - China begins investing in Somaliland
October 4, 2006 - The Japanese Emperor commits suicide. Many elders follow his example to free up resources for the newer generations
November 2006 - The Federation and USSR agree to sign a deal to withdraw from Greece after previous attempts at ending the war fail
November 10, 2006 - Sublime Gorgol is overthrown in a slave uprising 
November 23, 2006 - An Alliance of Nations investigative report into the war crimes committed by China during the invasion of Taiwan finds that over three million people were murdered
December 1, 2006 - Displaying a Moroccan flag is punishable by death
January 2007 - The USSR begins constructing a massive border wall with China
January 1, 2007 - The Red Army retreats from the Tajik SSR
January 5, 2007 - The German-Soviet Split occurs when the USSR refuses to help East Germany invade West Germany
January 12, 2007 - Poland founds the People’s Coalition
January 28, 2007 - The Truce of Athens is signed and both the USSR and European Federation leave Greece. The country is left to collapse in the following years
February 4, 2007 - The USSR establishes the Turkish SSR, though it is essentially just a military outpost to keep watch on the Black Sea
February 9, 2007 - A Qatifist militant attempts to destroy Mount Lebanon
February 21, 2007 - The Third Sino-Japanese War starts: the first PLA warships are sent to Japan
February 26, 2007 - The Hudson Bay Sea Barrier is completed in New York
March 1, 2007 - East Germany enters a union with Czechia
March 24, 2007 - An uprising in Taiwan burns down the world’s last supply of sugarcane
April 2007 - The average temperature in the southern half of the United States is over 90 degrees
April 2007 - October 2008 - Border clashes between Czechia and Slovakia leave thousands dead
May 22, 2007 - Solar cell production efficiency peaks at this time
June 6, 2007 - Stilinski’s Method is discovered, which is a process of separating dangerous chemicals from human waste for processing it into fertilizer 
June 9, 2007 - The first wind farm in Ireland is completed 
June 21, 2007 - El Paso, Texas is declared “unsustainable” by the Sweeney Administration
July 4, 2007 - A border clash leads to Canada and the US fearing conflict with each other. Over 50 die before an unstable peace is established
July 7, 2007 - The last Bahraini oil rig falls into the ocean, killing the Pakistani survivors on it
August 2007 - An entire PLA navy fleet goes missing off the coast of India
August 18, 2007 - Takumi Aoyama, Japan’s Minister for Energy, founds the Steward Society
October 1, 2007 - 40th US President Elliot Graves dies of cancer in his personal estate in Grants Pass, Oregon
November 1, 2007 - China stops aiding Guatemala, causing it to become a failed state in the coming years
December 2007 - The Sino-Soviet Border Wall is complete
December 10, 2007 - Australia develops the first bifacial solar cell 
January 6, 2008 - The United States reports its first case of the Red Flu
January 26, 2008 - The Sweeney Administration reorganizes the Department of Health into the Department of Sanitation and the Department of Hospitals
Early 2008 - The Great Asian Dust Bowl spans Istanbul to Shanghai
February 27, 2008 - The Socialists and Monarchist factions in Morocco form a truce to wage war on the Federation occupiers
April 2008 - A heatwave destroys the last major superfarm in the South, outside of Charlottesville, North Carolina
April 14, 2008 - An extremely powerful storm lifts an entire USSR military base off the ground in the Uzbek SSR
May 13, 2008 - To prevent another famine, Food, Inc begins experimenting with using jellyfish blooms as a food source
May 26, 2008 - Food, Inc begins buying up a huge amount of bankrupt fishing companies and using their fleet to catch jellyfish
July 2, 2008 - The first wind farm in the Nordic Union is completed 
August 2008 - Benghazi is sieged by rebel forces and is bailed out by a nearby Soviet fleet
August 9, 2008 - A massive protest in Casablanca leads to several Federation soldiers taken hostage by Monarchist forces. In response, the Federation simply bombs them, killing over 400 people
September 2008 - The Red Flu spreads throughout Libya
September 1, 2008 - Poland invades Hungary
November 4, 2008 - Sweeney wins reelection, this is the first election when members of the Green Party win seats in the house
November 5, 2008 - Jennifer Walker of Arizona becomes the first GNC governor
November 22, 2008 - Food, Inc Ration Gamma makes its first appearance on store shelves
December 31, 2008 - 50% of the Soviet military has been retrofitted to use nuclear power
January 1, 2009 - The USSR is spending almost a quarter of their budget trying to keep the Outer Republics afloat
January 29, 2009 - After a lengthy case, the Supreme Court rules 5-4 that euthanasia is legal
March 11, 2009 - Brooklyn Naval Yard is turned into housing for the poor 
Spring, 2009 - The last usable tractors break down, causing the entire world to switch to tending to crops by hand
May 2009 - A massive flood on the coast of North Africa causes Algiers and Morocco’s coast to be abandoned 
June 2009 - The Moroccan Civil War resumes
Summer 2009 - The last reserves of Coal on Taiwan are mined
July 18, 2009 - Due to Siberian plant diseases, President Sweeney is forced to reduce the calorie ration in the Universal Food Ration
October 10, 2009 - The USSR creates its first successful nuclear-powered train prototype
October 18, 2009 - The first wind farm is finished in the UK
November 15, 2009 - The UK shuts down the last buses in London
December 18, 2009 - The Libyan rebels sue for peace
Winter 2009 - Forests dying off en masse throughout Eurasia due to the combined effects of ancient plant diseases, wildfires, acid rain and drought

The Years of Salt and Lead (2010-2020)

2010 - Global temp. anomaly passes 4°C. Africa’s population is 2.1 billion. By this time, all cargo ships, and most naval ships, have been disassembled for parts. Qatar is considered cursed. Most of Australia’s 30 million inhabitants are crowded into 10 cities around its eastern coast
January 13, 2010 - Tripoli is burnt to the ground by refugees of the former United Arab Republic of the Nile
January 19, 2010 - The refugees take over several Libyan boats and attempt to cross the sea into the Federation but are wiped out by the Federation navy
January 21, 2010 - The Syktyvkar Bombing occurs, starting the USSR “Shadow War”. Martial Law is declared and Savateev and Voronin begin purging their opponents 
April 2010 - New York’s population is over 37 million
April 1, 2010 - The Third Sino-Japanese War ends in a stalemate
Spring 2010 - Most of the world has switched to some variant of Stilinski’s Method as a way of producing fertilizer from human waste, as oil-based fertilizers are too expensive to make now
June 8, 2010 - Portland secedes from the United States, briefly forming Cascadia
June 23, 2010 - Anton Agassi is found dead outside his apartment in the Finnish SSR
August 13, 2010 - Poland invades and annexes Slovakia
Summer 2010 - 60% of the Politburo is purged
September 2, 2010 - Cascadian nationalists are executed on live television, and most give up fighting. Corporations that helped retake the Northwest are given small corporate “fiefdoms” to operate as they see fit
September 4, 2010 - Voronin declares himself dictator of the USSR, ending the Shadow War
September 10, 2010 - The American Volunteer Army, a terrorist group, is formed in Saint Paul, Minnesota
September 18, 2010 - The USSR adopts its sixth and final constitution, fully turning the USSR into a totalitarian dictatorship like under Stalin
September 27, 2010 - The USSR is restructured into 9 “Core” Republics and establishes the Bastion Doctrine
November 2010 - The governors of both Hawai’i and New Mexico flip to Green
January 29, 2011 - Poland annexes Hungary
February 2011 - The EF begins a plan to build many wind farms across Europe
March 11, 2011 - A massive earthquake hits Japan
March 21, 2011 - Benghazi is destroyed in a storm
Spring 2011 - Agricultural potential in the US peaks around this time. AVA sabotages begin to cause famines
April 1, 2011 - By this point, food riots regularly happen at least once a week. About 110 people were killed per day at food riots
April 22, 2011 - Albania enters civil war again
May 4, 2011 - Tunis is burned to the ground by a raving band of refugees
June 2011 - Refugee crises cause Romania and Bulgaria to fall to civil war
Summer 2011 - The Purple Summer: A huge heatwave followed by a months-long famine shakes the world. Riot patrols became routine in all major cities. The Wadi Fleet become Scavengers. Most farms are moved into greenhouses or underground
July 17, 2011 - The Moroccan Civil War devolves into anarchy
July 24, 2011 - The Sweeney Administration abolished the FDA
July 29, 2011 - A final slave uprising overthrows the Salt Lords of Mauritania, causing a civil war and eventually anarchy
September 9, 2011 - A nuclear power plant melts down near Brussels, EF, causing the Federation to decommission all of their nuclear power plants out of fear
September 13, 2011 - After an armed robbery by Klan members, Food, Inc stops using trucks to transport their goods and switches solely to train
December 15, 2011 - A Food, Inc Plant outside of Madison, Wisconsin is bombed by the AVA
December 19, 2011 - Poland begins building a border wall in the south of Hungary
December 31, 2011 - The Soviet Government officially abandons the 10 “Outer Republics” 
January 1, 2012 - Project 444 is enacted in China. 80% of Somaliland’s population has fled the country
February 2012 - All hospitals in the UK have been forced to use only the most basic equipment, with all their remaining advanced 20th century equipment being sent to the Federation in “tribute” 
February 2, 2012 - The Constantine Confederacy is “formed” 
Spring, 2012 - A record number of members of the CCP commit suicide
April, 2012 - The chance of a Steamer exploding has been reduced to only 0.9%
Summer, 2012 - The final astronaut orbits the globe and mourns at humanity’s fall
November 6, 2012 - Peter Jarret wins the election. This is the first election where members of the Green Party win electoral votes. The governors of Washington, Oregon, California, and Nevada all flip to Green
December 6, 2012 - Gaddafi is killed by Savateev loyalists during a purge
January 20, 2013 - Peter Jarret is sworn in. Former President Sweeney is given a spot on the Food, Inc Board of Directors and private farm in Michigan
January 21, 2013 - President Jarret signs a slew of executive orders curtailing the power of State’s Rights, suspending Birthright Citizenship, and dissolving the Select Committee on the Enforcement of Servile Rights
February 23, 2013 - Project Righteous Mercy, a mass sterilization biological weapon, is released on the Chinese populace
March 5, 2013 - Third Thai Uprising
April 2013 - A group of Italian Neo-Crusaders attempt to extract oil in Bahrain, they all die by the end of the month
May 2, 2013 - The El Paso massacre occurs. The Jarret Administration claims it was not involved and it was a rogue group of National Guardsmen 
May 4, 2013 - FulTec creates their “Plenty” product, recycling human flesh as filler. It is sold but not mainstream at this point, the variations of their “Natural” product still being more viable
June 9, 2013 - Food, Inc’s main production plant for Connecticut, located outside of Hartford, is destroyed by AVA 
June 14, 2013 - An investigation into the Hartford Bombing finds that a National Guard Armory in Massachusetts was broken into
June 17, 2013 - The last nationalist movement in the Outer Republics dies out
July 10, 2013 - Secretary Frieda Weisser of East Germany dies, and the Democratic Republic of Germany becomes increasingly fascistic, adopting “National Communism with German Characteristics” 
Summer 2013 - KGB Raids and Red Army patrols become commonplace in Voronin’s USSR
September 2013 - Moscow’s energy grid is fully nuclear
November 28, 2013 - President Jarret holds a turkey dinner in the White House. This would lead to the Washington, DC riots of 2013, and afterwards, Washington, DC would be closed off to members of the general public
November 31, 2013 - The Safeguarding American Resources Act is passed, and integrates the Army into the security forces of important penal factories and superfarms. The National Guard is also integrated into the municipal police force of the largest metropolitan areas of their state, and answer directly to the governor
Winter 2013 - Due to fuel shortages and trains breaking down, superfarms are forced to distribute their goods to the nearest city
January 26, 2014 - First reported use of Scoopers in riots
February, 2014 - Many scientists around the world notice a dramatic decrease in insect populations
March 2014 - The Jarret Administration begins withholding the Universal Food Ration from areas suspected of harboring AVA members
April 4, 2014 - The entire PLA navy fleet is sunk off the coast of Sydney, Australia
April 15, 2014 - To prevent the food supply from completely running out, President Sweeney authorizes the Food, Inc to use the Navy to scout out places that have usable precious metals to keep their factories running
May 2014 - Research by the Red Army into using plant diseases as biological weapons leads the KGB to conclude that China is recycling their dead for food
May 22, 2014 - The Food, Inc Convoy arrives in India
June 2, 2014 - In an emergency, top secret meeting between Jarret’s Cabinet and the Board of Food, Inc, an agreement is reached to test out using human flesh as filler
June 10, 2014 - The Food, Inc tests out Ration Omega on unsuspecting Indian Survivors in exchange for precious metals in the ruins of India
July 9, 2014 - Last reported case of a rat outside of a city in the USA
November 2014 - As a result of the Midterms a vast amount of politicians in the Northeast turn Green
November 27, 2014 - East Germany annexes Czechia
December 1, 2014 - Citing “increased terrorist activity”, all remaining public rail lines, buses and boats in the Federation are closed
December 4, 2014 - The Pilgrims are formed after a meeting in Boston, Massachusetts 
December 7, 2014 - The Pilgrims attempt to assassinate a high-ranking Democratic representative in Maine, prompting an investigation from the Jarret Administration and replacing all the incoming Green politicians with loyal Democrats
December 2014 - The Soviet military swells to 45 million active service members
January 1, 2015 - China’s net population has decreased for the first time ever
January 9, 2015 - Poland finishes their border wall to the south of Hungary
January 15, 2015 - Food, Inc begins researching more cost-effective methods of collecting algae for foodstuffs
January 25, 2015 - Congressional hearings into the GNC’s supposed involvement with the Pilgrims leads to Former President Smith stepping down as Chairman of the GNC
January 30, 2015 - Bowling Green Textiles Company changes their terms of service so that modified clothing is no longer able to be repaired, thus causing a drastic reduction in creativity in clothing and fashion
February 18, 2015 - Voronin dies of cancer at age 74
February 26, 2015 - Ration Gamma, an algae and seaweed based foodstuff, begins to be sold in the US
March 1, 2015 - Savateev becomes dictator of the Soviet Union
Spring 2015 - FulTec and Food, Inc are using insects as filler. Algae-based food is tested, but expensive
April, 2015 - Last major accessible deposits of natural gas are exhausted
Summers 2015 and 16 - The Great Heatwaves occur as a result of “Hyper El Ninos” - the last of the world’s major vegetation shrivels up and dies, including around the Great Lakes. Food, Inc around this time decides that cannibalism is the only viable option - whether it actually was is unknown. Global temp. anomaly passes 5°C
June 10, 2015 - The last federal emergency reserves of the Universal Food Ration are exhausted
July 11, 2015 - In an emergency top secret session of Congress, Project Omega is authorized. Most are told that it is simply recycling human corpses as fertilizer, and is only a temporary measure
August, 2015 - Due to coal unions, coal becomes the dominant energy source in Europe and the UK
August 30, 2015 - Food, Inc releases their new product, Ration Omega, to the USA
October 1, 2015 - The Jarret Administration declares Hawai’i unsustainable, mainly as a way to remove the Green Party stronghold there
October 15, 2015 - Due to the heatwave continuing, Project Omega is temporarily extended to the end of 2016
November 2015 - FulTec begins to mass-produce Plenty to avoid a food crisis when temperatures surge again the following year as projected. As Natural becomes too unviable to create Plenty quickly replaces it
December 2015 - The Universal Food Ration, supplemented by Ration Omega, is slowly reimplemented 
January 6, 2016 - Survivors in North Yemen make contact with Hejaz
March 2, 2016 - To incentivize citizens to willingly take their lives, President Jarret implements generous “death benefits” for their next of kin
April 9, 2016 - The first Euthanasia Clinic is opened in Madison Square Garden, New York City
Summer 2016 - The Second Great Heatwave is so intense that almost half of the United States becomes nocturnal due to the extreme UV radiation
June 5, 2016 - The USSR implements the “Worker’s Lottery”. Civil unrest dies down
June 26, 2016 - President Jarret begins drafting up a contingency for the total collapse of the United States. This would later be known as Operation: Eagle’s Nest
July 17, 2016 - A fleet carrying millions of Algerian refugees are sunk by the Federation Navy
August 21, 2016 - President Jarret reveals that the RNC broke into the Watergate Hotel in 1972, and this causes the remaining hardcore Republicans to vote Green
October 30, 2016 - The Survivor’s Council of Kuwait City is formed
November 2016 - Egyptian refugees build a town called “New Cairo” around the last remaining desalination plant in Libya
November 8, 2016 - Jarret is re-elected after Food, Inc dumps billions of dollars into his campaign. 
Due to resource shortages, the elections in the Northeast and Rust Belt are rigged. This is the first election where the Republicans win no electoral votes
January 20, 2017 - President Jarret uses Executive Orders to cut more services. The Department of Welfare is reduced to only the Universal Food Ration, the National Relief was abolished, and National Monuments began to be sold off to collectors
February 2017 - Tunisian city-states start to join the Constantine Confederacy
March 13, 2017 - A secret report by NASA, using the few satellites still in orbit, predicts that 97% of the surface of the Earth would become uninhabitable by 2070. As a result, Project Omega is extended indefinitely 
March 16, 2017 - President Jarret dismantles NASA and sells their equipment to various corporations
April 5, 2017 - With no more fuel, President Jarret sells off the US Air Force
April 22, 2017 - President Jarret repeals just about every antitrust and anti-monopoly law. This results in Food, Inc buying up companies left in right, soon controlling the entire food supply of the United States
April 26, 2017 - The last shipment of Food, Inc White is made
May 2017 - Food, Inc begins buying off members of the Green Party
July 1, 2017 - The Council Militia is formed in Kuwait City
July 2017 - The Monarchists and Socialists ally one last time and kick out the remnant Federation forces, who flee Morocco
October 2017 - Japan begins importing materials from Australia and New Zealand
April 2018 - Food, Inc begins influencing Mexican politics to cause a civil war
July 5, 2018 - A Spanish Warlord takes over half of western Algeria
November 2018 - By the Midterms of 2018, the Green Party is just as corporatist as the Democratic Party 
December 2018 - The Jarret Administration begins increasing tensions with Canada
Winter 2018 - The entirety of the Core Republics have a nuclear power grid
2019 - Global temp. anomaly passes 6°C
January 15, 2019 - Food, Inc’s Oceanographic Survey is completed and the results are horrifying. Plankton are dying at quintuple the rate they were reproducing
May 26, 2019 - A small civil war erupts in China when it’s revealed that Siliao is made from human flesh
June 3, 2019 - Fourth Thai Uprising, as part of the Second Chinese Civil War
July 2019 - First Libyan Uprising
Summer 2019 - Last major famine in the Soviet Union, 15 million die

The Rotting 20s (2020-2027)

January 1, 2020 - World population hits 11.7 billion
January 29, 2020 - Former President Smith is placed under house arrest for his suspected involvement with the Pilgrims
February 2020 - The USSR begins constructing Voronin’s Wall, a border wall separating Central Europe from the USSR
March 11, 2020 - The last functioning hydroelectric dam in the EF outside of Denmark shuts down
March 13, 2020 - The Jarret Administration begins opening up Hawai’i to the very rich
Spring 2020 - Most of the American south, below the Mason-Dixon line, is uninhabitable. 40% of previously arable land is unusable due to intensive agriculture
April 1, 2020 - New York City has a population of 40 million, Philadelphia has a population of 15 million. New York City has a crime rate of 172 murders per day. US population is 600 million.
April 4, 2020 - Project Eyes of Heaven begins development
April 12, 2020 - President Jarret begins privatizing huge amounts of federal land for strip mining and intensive farming
April 20, 2020 - First reported case of “dumpster diver” squads, people paid to scavenge through landfills for valuable items thrown away during the Glorious Decades
May 2020 - The Wadi Water cult is formed
May 15, 2020 - Due to immense pushback from the privatization of all water sources, water is added to the Universal Food Ration
June 19, 2020 - A new bill passed by the Jarret Administration mandates that every single city have at least one Euthanasia Clinic per 10,000 people
June 29, 2020 - The 30th Amendment enshrines assisted suicide as a constitutionally protected right
June 30, 2020 - Scientists working for the Steward Society create the first multi-junction solar cell
October 2020 - The Euphrates river dries up
November 3, 2020 - Roy Sanderson is elected President
December 1, 2020 - At an Alliance of Nations meeting in Bern, Switzerland, the remaining countries in the world all come to the conclusion that civilization is about to collapse
January 15, 2021 - The Department of American Continuity is formed
January 20, 2021 - President Sanderson attempts to undo the “Of the People, For the People” Act of 2002, the Labor and Work Reform Act of 2004, and the American Workers and Unions Act of 2005 but the Supreme Court strikes them down 
February 2021 - The Department of American Continuity begins collecting seed samples and freezing livestock embryos to be sent to Hawai’i and Alaska
March 26, 2021 - President Sanderson attempts to push a bill through Congress increasing the calorie and water ration in the Universal Food Ration. Only the increase in water allowance goes through. 
April 9, 2021 - President Sanderson attempts to reform the FDA but Food, Inc lobbies against it
Spring 2021 - The USSR begins a two-child policy
June 2021 - The Great Drought Occurs, cascading into a brutal famine in the Great Plains. President Sanderson learns the truth of what Ration Omega really is
June 23, 2021 - President Sanderson attempts to fund research into more resource-effective farming methods but nothing comes of it
July 2021 - A massive sandstorm causes all the desalination plants in Kuwait City to malfunction, causing water riots with a death toll of over 6000
July 4, 2021 - The Pilgrims officially endorse President Sanderson and pledge to end their operations in Maine. 
July 5, 2021 - President Sanderson sends Vice President James Dent to negotiate with the Pilgrims in an effort to bring an end to the violence, however VP Dent is held hostage
July 10, 2021 - VP Dent is rescued from the Pilgrim compound he was held hostage in, and President Sanderson reluctantly authorizes the military to wipe out the Pilgrims and AVA
July 11, 2021 - President Sanderson reverses the increase of the Water Ration to divert it to irrigation in an attempt to mitigate the famine
July 20, 2021 - President Sanderson, suspecting that the food shortage is the work of malnourished farm workers, attempts to reinstate civil rights for penal workers but is shut down by the Supreme Court
October 2021 - President Sanderson attempts to negotiate with the Canadian government for aid. He is unsuccessful. 
November - December 2021 - The Night War occurs, as a nationalist militia organized by the Green Party wages war on Mexican incursions in the Southwest. 
December 1, 2021 - Washington DC is turned into a fortress city occupied solely by members of the Government
Winter 2022 - Black Winter occurs, food rations stretched to their limits
March 12, 2022 - The first rat farm opens in Siberia
July 31, 2022 - Denver is declared “unsustainable” by the Sanderson Administration
August 1, 2022 - President Sanderson receives an encrypted message to meet someone at the Chencoln Memorial. President Sanderson speaks to David Sturges, the last Commissioner of the FDA, attempts to share evidence of Operation: Eagle’s Nest and the 2017 NASA report but is killed before President Sanderson can learn the full details
August 2022 - November 2022 - President Sanderson is placed in protective custody in the White House and is guarded at all times
August 19, 2022 - President Sanderson is forced to sign a bill of “internal security”, authorizing the use of lethal force to protect a potential security leak in New Jersey
August 23, 2022 - Tartus is destroyed in a flood 
November 2022 - Acting President Dent and the Department of American Continuity decide that from now on, elections will be predetermined. This ensures that only politicians they can trust will be in power, and the Republican Party goes extinct. 
2023 - Global temp. anomaly passes 7°C
January 2023 - The Great Famine has gotten so bad that even the very rich are noticing a decrease in their quality of life
January 12, 2023 - Tartus begins to be rebuilt
February 15, 2023 - President Sanderson’s infamous “Seeking God” speech is aired. He would later be impeached for the speech. Some presidents try to limit Food, Inc's influence but have their privileges revoked. Sanderson suggesting mass suicide is actually him going against Food, Inc.
February 2023 - May 2024 - President Sanderson is once again placed under “executive protection” in the White House
March 26, 2023 - The American Bounty Act is rubber stamped by the Sanderson administration
April 1, 2023 - The crime rate of New York City is 243 murders per day
April 9, 2023 - The last Klan holdout is eradicated by the Panthers, who now rule the south
April 24, 2023 - The Spanish Warlord who took over most of western Algeria is killed by his lieutenant, and his lands fracture into infighting
May 2023 - Disillusioned raiders in the Atlas Mountains leave their communes and drift west, eventually becoming scavengers on the coast of Morocco
May 10, 2023 - Kuwait Towers collapse in a massive storm, killing 70,000 people
August 1, 2023 - The largest hurricane ever recorded wipes out the last remaining towns in the Deep South
September 19, 2023 - The survivors in North Yemen sign a treaty and join Hejaz
November 9, 2023 - East Germany gets increasingly militaristic
November 25, 2023 - The pirates in Libya start fighting each other 
December 7, 2023 - President Sanderson is trusted enough to leave the White House and attends a cabinet meeting about the growing famine
January 2024 - Radioactive salt particles from the Dead Sea rain down on much of the Levant region
February 2024 - The Wadi League begins building their houses out of brick and stone rather than wood and metal
February 19, 2024 - 41st US President, Clifford Smith, dies of pollution-related causes in his farm outside Eagle Lake, Maine
March 2024 - The ruins of South Yemen are essentially divided between two proto-states
March 1, 2024 - An emergency bill is passed ceding all of President Sanderson’s executive power to Vice President Dent
May 27, 2024 - The Department of American Continuity decide that their plans are far enough so that they no longer need to hide them from President Sanderson
Summer of 2024 - Water supplies get so low in the United States that for a short time, water riots become more deadly than food riots
October 2024 - Members of President Graves’s and President Smith’s cabinet start to disappear, and the remaining 13 “Stone Men” disappear as well. CEOs not connected to Operation: Eagle’s Nest begin to mysteriously vanish as well
November 5, 2024 - Richard Holden wins the Presidency, with Dean Willamson as his running mate
November 11, 2024 - Japan’s electric rail line in Tokyo, the last running rail line, is shut down to ration energy to desalination plants after their solar panels completely melt 
2025 - The Last Winter: Snowfall is recorded for the last time, in Antarctica 
January 1, 2025 - The Red Flu has killed an estimated 341 million people
January 9, 2025 - President Sanderson forces his way into the FCC building in an attempt to broadcast a message over the EBS telling America to rise up. He is found by Vice President Dent and President-Elect Holden, and placed in a house in Washington, DC where he is watched at all times
January 20, 2025 - Richard Holden is sworn in, and declares a “National Agricultural Emergency”, giving the Department of American Continuity further power to carry out their goals. He also blames the current living situation on Canada
March 12, 2025 - The Battle of Hama happens in Syria
March 13, 2025 - Australia runs out of silicon
March 18, 2025 - 44th US President Roy Sanderson is found dead outside his house in Washington, DC
April 10, 2025 - Egyptian pirates in Libya attempt to invade the Constantine Confederacy
April 15, 2025 - The last dairy farms in the Midwest are moved to Alaska as part of Operation: Eagle’s Nest
Summer 2025 - 19 States are declared unsustainable by the Holden Administration
June 2025 - The desert around Kuwait City becomes lethally hot, forcing the survivors to use boats to comb the Persian Gulf for repair materials
July 4, 2025 - President Holden authorizes placing opioids in the water supply to pacify the population
August 18, 2025 - President Holden signs a bill that authorizes the creation of “population control squads” which begin to round up people and execute them under the guise of “counter-terrorism operations and gang violence”. 
September 2025 - President Holden and Vice President Williamson begin an investigation to tie up the last loose end of the Food, Inc Leak of 2022: Courtney Brown
October 2025 - Second Libyan uprising
November 4, 2025 - The Department of American Continuity begins planning the next phase of Operation: Eagle’s Nest - the invasion of Canada
December 2025 - President Holden begins a huge recruitment campaign to shore up the Armed Forces for the invasion of Canada
2026 - Global temp. anomaly passes 8°C
January - March 2026 - The United States becomes increasingly nationalistic and sees the Armed Forces surge to over 30 million active members. 
January 2026 - Refugees fleeing from the European Spring join the Scavengers in Morocco
February 19, 2026 - Courtney Brown is found, and is forced to be President Holden’s personal mistress
March 1, 2026 - Members of the Department of American Continuity head to Argentina for the final Alliance of Nations meeting
March 5, 2026 - The Antarctica Conference
November 3, 2026 - The Solar Flare hits Earth. Chaos ensues
November 5, 2026 - The Wadi League Civil War begins
November 16, 2026 - The Constantine Confederacy “civil war” starts
December 5, 2026 - The General Secretary of the Somaliland Communist Party is found in a mass suicide ritual
January 1, 2027 - The countries with remaining air forces are the USSR, the Patagonian Alliance, Japan, and Australia and New Zealand
February 2027 - Most technology that has been restored after the Solar Flare is locked to 1940s era technology
March 16, 2027 - Population extermination squads start executing people
March 30, 2027 - The USA invades Canada
May, 2027 - The Great America Dust Bowl expands into Canada
June 12, 2027 - China invades the USSR
June 13th, 2027 - A Soviet nuke strikes Beijing and starts “Project Eyes of Heaven” early, releasing the bioweapon before completion and arguably officially starting the Great Death
June 14, 2027 - With President Holden mysteriously missing from the White House, Vice President Dean Williamson assumes the role of Acting President
June 15, 2027 - Nuclear war wipes out the rest of civilization

Great Death (2027-2035)

June 16, 2027 - The remaining elites gather the seed and embryo samples they could obtain and head into bunkers. The USA goes to Alaska and Hawaii, Australia and New Zealand go to Tasmania, the Nordic Union go to Svalbard, the USSR go to Yuzhny Island, the European Federation go to Iceland while the remaining world powers (Argentina, Poland, East Germany and Japan) colonize Antarctica 
June 27, 2027 - 43rd US President Peter S. Jarret is killed in a mutiny by US Marines on the way to Juneau, Alaska
January 9, 2028 - Dean Williamson, the 46th and last President of the United States, dies of radiation poisoning outside of Duluth, Minnesota
October 2028: The Pacific “Hypercane” forms, destroying many settlements that survived EoH in Oceania
2028-2035 - Unprecedented famine sweeps the world, killing almost everyone who survived Project Eyes of Heaven and nuclear war
June 15, 2032 - 42nd US President Frederick Sweeney dies of old age in a bunker in Antarctica 
October 23, 2033 - Richard Holden dies in a bunker in Antarctica 
April 2035 - The last Qatifists die out

The Great Silence (2035-2127)
Spring 2040 - The survivors start surveying the land in Antarctica
Mid 2051: Resettlement projects in the mainland begin
2060-2080: Expeditions into the ruined mainland. 
January 1, 2070 - The Fujairah enclave is wiped out
2086: Resettlement of New York.
2087: The USSR’s remnants make contact with the Antarctic expedition. Small survivor enclaves in the Arctic Circle and parts of the southern tip of South America + Australia are found. Wars break out between the Survivors, who have not forgotten the sins of the past and seek to enact a bloody war of revenge, and the Expeditioners, who ironically are quite peaceful and share their bounty with the survivors. Decades of living in cramped bunkers and never knowing if resettlement is even possible has created a sense of intense community and selflessness.
2088 - The last oil fires in the Middle East finally stop burning
2092: The Survivors and Expeditioners make peace, and the various remnants of the governments start to rebuild their nations.
January 1, 2105: The Great Fire. Somehow, (haven’t decided yet), the vast repository of knowledge that the scientists prepared in the 2020s gets destroyed. Humanity never recovers.
2100: The new societies start to forget their past sins and become more hedonistic, however they can never get too lazy as the amount of minerals left and the small amount of arable land keeps humanity very small (probably 1 million at most)
January 1, 2122 - Rodger Richard Holden’s fast forward happens

The Second Dark Age (2127-2462)

The Second Renaissance (2462-3000)

I’m pretty much done with the chapter, but if you’re curious about the BtS lore I’ve kept all my notes here

USSR General
Power behind the Throne: Chief Director Sergei Savateev of the KGB, and Ivan Voronin, the “New Generalissimo” and Supreme Marshal of the Soviet Union. General Secretary is Gennady Yanayev from 1982-1997. He is followed by Constantin Rutskoy from 1997-2010. During the Shadow Civil War, Savateev pits Voronin and Rutskoy against each other and convinces Voronin to become dictator. 
Gulags Re-Opened for political dissidents (Vorkuta Coal basin makes sense when you don’t spend 90% of time throwing snow off roads)
Siberia is actually somewhat hospitable, and nobody cares about the disease deaths - just send in more convicts to replace the ones who die
KGB Returns in full force, real power behind the throne
Satellites are getting rowdy, the old junta geezers who took power in Satellite States in the 90s (Think OTL Polish Martial Law) are getting old and senile and there’s nobody to replace them
Lake Baikal drained to do irrigation, beforehand there were jokes about how it constantly caught fire.
In the 80s, the warsaw pact countries start trading amongst themselves
The USSR claims that their prosperity comes from their strict adherence to Marxism-Leninism, with even a resurgence of Stalinism. China turned to capitalism and doomed the world. 
The USSR doesn’t eat their dead but they do use them for fertilizer in Siberia. 
State of the outer republics/countries they annex in the 90s
KGB focuses on keeping European Russia in check. 
Eastern Europe is pretty much left to fend for itself in the 2000s. 
In the 2020s, Green Siberia is worked to the bone to provide for European Russia. 
Due to extensive industrialisation the demographic boom at the beginning of Food, Inc era stopped mostly because every sudden industrialisation of any agrarian country can lead to sudden demographic changes
In the 1990s, the USSR forcibly makes the rest of Europe not in the EU join the Warsaw Pact
Finland tries to resist, gets overwhelmed by massive Soviet hordes. EU and D.C. rattle sabers but do nothing due to deteriorating situation at home. Scandinavia and other neutral states pay lip service to Warsaw Pact but in reality remain basically independent. After the Reds Withdraw the Warsaw Pact States (Now a mix of Communist Dictatorships, Military Juntas that shed off all pretense of Communism while keeping the old elite, and Nationalist Regimes that took charge after killing and eating their nomenklaturas) decide it’s better to hand together than hang separately and remain in a very clenched-teeth alliance, trying to toe the line between Brussels and Moscow. 
Multiple failed uprisings occur in the 80s - notable ones are in 1982, 1984 and 1987. These insurrections give the KGB ammunition to impose far more draconian laws. 
USSR Shadow Civil War - internal restructuring of administrative regions. The “Core Republics” are resettled while the rest of the USSR starts dying off in 2010
Russia
Byelorussia
Ukraine
Moldova
Latvia 
Estonia 
Lithuania
Siberia
Finland
People’s Coalition - The successor to the Warsaw Pact after Shadow War causes Soviet Troops to be withdrawn from Eastern Europe
Partitioned Albania 
Turkish Bulgaria 
Slovakia 
Hungary 
East Germany 
Poland
Romania 
Partitioned Yugoslavia
Failed States - Due to desertification these areas, while still labeled as Soviet republics on maps, are abandoned by 2020
Uzbek
Kazakh
Kirghiz
Tajik
Turkmen
Georgia
Azerbaijan
Armenia 
Afghanistan 
Iran 
Turkey 
USSR - As a Whole 
1969 - Brezhnev is killed by a disgruntled soviet soldier. Later narratives would claim that it was an agent of Chen. As a result of this, and the Soviet cosmonauts being injured, Soviet spaceships would be designed for war as well. This is partly in response to the Lockheed and Douglass aircraft merge the year earlier and the advance of American planes
1964-1969 - Any attempt of Sino-Soviet peace evaporates once Leonid Brezhnev is killed. As the Triumvirate is formed, the Soviet Union takes a hardliner stance of China, believing Chen to be combining the genocidal excess of the Cultural Revolution with the betrayal of communism for capitalism. 
1969 - Triumvirate Established: the General Secretary, Director of the KGB and the Minister of Defence after the failure of Khrushchev to successfully reform the Soviet Union. Any major decision made must satisfy two of the three men, and if anyone in the Soviet Government feels they are misusing their power, they can be removed and barred from holding any office in the future. This is also to prevent another Stalin, and also in response to Mao’s cult of personality (and later Chen’s). 
1969-1972 - Border skirmishes between the USSR and China are far deadlier in this timeline and leave over 2000 dead, along with the China-USSR border starting to become patrolled more often. 
1969-1982 - Anton Agassi is very personable much like Gorbachev. He walks in the streets and talks to the citizens in person. He spoke candidly about the problems the USSR was facing but always tied it back to the Sino-Soviet split 
1970 - The average age for the member of the Politburo is 49: Agassi forcibly retired several politburo members. 
1970 - The Soviet Union begins the process of “pan-Sovietism”, which eliminates cultural representation to create a sense that all the various ethnic minorities are one super majority - Soviet. This would lead to the ethnic tensions starting in 2009.
1970 - Agassi’s policies in combination with the Chancellor of West Germany recognizing East Germany as an independent state contributes to the normalizing of foreign and trade relations between the two. However, this makes East Germany feel betrayed. 
1970-1974 - The Soviet Union doesn’t so much create a detente with the USA, so much that it reorganizes and starts to believe that the new China under Chen is the greatest threat it faces. Many agreements from OTL relating to trade and arms limitations are still signed. 
1970-1975 - The Soviet Union still supports North Vietnam. Supplies, guns and training are funneled into the north. After the War ends, the Soviet Union does not recognize South Vietnam as a legitimate country. 
1970s - The concept of Eurocommunism never catches on. 
1970s - The USSR is more conservative in supporting Africa and South America. (This is so that China can do it in the 2000s) 
1970s - Anyone with pro-China viewpoints was considered clinically insane and sent to asylums 
1970s - Soviet society sees a huge increase in education and white-collar service industry 
1970s-80s - As a result of the reduced tension between the USA and USSR, Jews are allowed to emigrate at much higher numbers 
1970s-80s - The USSR never, ever democratizes during this period 
1971 - Soviet economy is centralized around industry in the north-west and agriculture in the south-east. This is more successful due to the Chinese intellectuals working with Soviet ones. 
1971 - Agassi removed the concept of the Brezhnev policy. After Chen took over the PRC, the USSR undoubtedly became the sole leader of the Communist world 
1971-74 - Some of the escaped Chinese nationals get jobs in the Politburo. They declare a government-in-exile and are given a small commie block in Moscow to operate out of. 
1972 - In response to China’s second industrial revolution, the USSR launches wide scale industrial production efforts. These help stimulate the failing USSR economy. 
1972 - Iraq is far more pro-Moscow 
1975 - Escaped Chinese intellectuals and engineers would help redesign the USSR’s infrastructure to be more efficient. Brutalist architecture is replaced with opulent but intimidating towers.
1975 - Using the advice of the escaped Chinese intellectuals, and also in opposition to Brezhnev's moderate stance, the agricultural system of the Soviet Union was overhauled. 
1975 - The Soviet government is more open to reform after seeing what happened to China and the Prague Spring
1975 - A new constitution of the Soviet Union is drafted. The new constitution enshrines the Soviet Union as the one true beacon of communism after the fall of China to Chenism. It also enshrines the Triumvirate System to prevent another cult of personality like how Mao or Stalin had. The new constitution, however, still emphasizes how the Soviet law has higher priority than local laws in the Republics. Like previous iterations, the citizens were in theory granted freedom of speech, freedom of the press and freedom of assembly religion, however there were always by-laws that prohibited these rights in relation to government opposition and organized religion. 
1975 - The United States, believing that China has been “saved”, shifts focus entirely to the Soviet Union. The Nixon administration would take the Helsinki Accords more seriously. 
1975 - After this year, “pro-Chinese sympathies” is the most common excuse used by the government 
1976 - With full on war with the west seeming less and less likely, the Soviet Union, after building enough nukes to rival the United States, starts divesting from their military to make public work programs.
1976 - Agassi meets with Morgan in West Germany and they have a good time
1976 - Inspired by the Shanghai Accords, the Soviet Union begins opening up free trade with its satellite states. These “independent” trades are not planned. 
1976-1988 - The USA does not resume defense spending, instead the US/USSR militaries stagnate during the late 70s/80s with the exception of exports. Because of this, the Soviet Union doesn’t have a submarine run aground near Sweden, and relations with the Nordic Countries are peaceful
1976-1988 - Both the Morgan and King administrations dance the fine line of being pro-China while working on easing tensions with the USSR
1979 - Because the Soviet Union does not directly intervene in Afghanistan, the policy of detente does not end. This does not lead to the boycotting of the 1980 and 1984 Olympics
1980 - Agassi is far more diplomatic when it comes to Afghanistan. Instead of invading it, they only send supplies and train troops. 
1980 - The Warsaw Pact countries began to slowly normalize trade with the West. This was prompted in part by the Polish Crisis
1980s - The Soviet Union begins importing terminals, food and other goods from the west
1980s - The Soviet Union does not go for a guns-over-butter policy 
1980s - The Soviet Union and the USA don’t place lots of missiles everywhere 
1980s - In the core USSR and throughout the eastern bloc, factories are updated and retooled to be more modern 
1981 - The Soviet Union does not stop working on space-based weapons
1982 - The First and Only Space War in the Food, Incverse. Tensions between China and the USSR briefly flare up when China tries to land a spaceship on the moon. The USSR, due to no formal warning by the Chinese on what they were doing, assumes that China is attempting to annex the moon. The place where China lands is very close to the work-in-progress space base the Soviets were building. And so begins a very brief low-orbit war. China and the USSR start knocking satellites down and when a low-yield nuke is detonated several thousand KM above Beijing, the USA starts mediating an end to the battle. President Morgan reminds both countries of the potential economic ramifications of their actions on their citizens, and this calms them down. The USA starts growing closer to the USSR as they were just as surprised as them, and this is what leads down the path of working together on a joint mission to the moon. Agassi steps down and Gennady Yanayev becomes the General Secretary who shows his hatred for China far subtler. The Station for International Cooperation and Friendship project is then drafted up by China and submitted to the United Nations as a way of normalizing relations between all three countries. It is then viewed as the end of the Cold War, as the Soviet Union starts opening up.
1983 - The Soviet Union adopts a fourth constitution. This constitution, crafted during the dizzying heights of the Glorious Decades, allows for the import of products approved by the state. The Soviet Union also allows for the export of cultural products to all countries. Citizens can buy and sell traditionally “subversive” material but must pay a huge tax on it and will be put on a list. Lastly, in a tiny amendment, the Soviet Union recognizes the Maoist government-in-exile to be the sole legal government of China. They are the only country to recognize this claim. 
1983 - A massive soviet rock concert is held in Moscow. Over a million people attend from all over the Eastern Bloc
1985 - The Concord of Moscow: Basically the USSR’s version of the Shanghai Accords. For a fee, a citizen of the Second World could petition the government to import a select item from the West, but only if it was mass produced in a Superfactory. Also facilitated free trade between members of the Eastern Bloc. 
1986 - 95% of Kazakhstan is uninhabitable due to pollution 
1986 - Chernobyl obviously doesn’t happen 
1988 - By this time, the USSR economy doesn’t collapse. The economy is worth 4.08 Trillion USD in Q1 1988. The restructuring of the USSR Economy and the trade relations established with the west (while still under a planned economy), not invading Afghanistan, the lack of military buildup in the 80s, and helping the economies of its satellite states become self-reliant, the USSR is thriving, though not as opulent as the west is. The standard of living is probably comparable to 1970s USA
1989 - Soviet invasion of Iran, as the brainchild of conservative communist Ivan Voronin. The hope was that the Soviet Union could stop the fires and salvage some oil from the Middle East however this plan falls through by 1992 when it becomes clear that there is no salvaging it
1989 - After the crash, the Soviet Union tries to woo Western Europe into joining the Eastern Bloc. This resistance is partly what prompts the creation of the Eurofed
1989 - Soviet invasion of Afghanistan: Due to foreign relations disappearing overnight, Voronin proposes an invasion of Afghanistan as the USSR no longer has to worry about keeping the USA on its good side
1990 - The Balkan Uprising: When Yugoslavia invades the Warsaw Pact the Soviet Union has to draw troops away from Mongolia. 
1991-1995 - As China starts invading their neighbors, the USSR sounds the alarm and starts a massive build up of their military. This would cause the Soviet Economy to become one of the only growing economies during this time. 
1991 - Partition of Yugoslavia
1992 - The USSR does not participate in the Olympics 
1992 - Partition of Albania
1994 - The USSR military begins transitioning to using nuclear fuel
1995-2000 - The Soviets leverage access to Ukrainian grain to cause Turkey to become increasingly dependent on Soviet policy. 
1996 - A major ethnic conflict is sparked between ethnic Armenians and Azerbaijani. This prompts the USSR to demand all internally replaced refugees swear loyalty to the USSR and USSR only. 
1997 - Creation of Farmer’s Bounty, the USSR’s version of Food, Inc, FulTec and Siliao. It is made from the same type of oats usually fed to horses. 
February 24, 1997 - A Soviet Probe surveys the moon for oil. None is found.
1997 - The USSR attempts to annex Finland, however the Nordic Union comes to their aid. 
October 1998 - The Soviet Union starts blocking all land routes into East Germany
1999 - After a major famine (20 million dead) the USSR forcibly starts irrigating the rivers of Siberia to support massive superfarms. Central Asian refugees are sent to work in farm gulags. 
1999 - After the costly Nordic War, Finland becomes the 18th Soviet Republic. The Helsinki Treaty is signed and the Nordic Union must give the USSR 1 billion bushels of grain a year for “peace”. 
2000 - The 15th five year plan restructures the entire economy yet again - All of Siberia is dedicated solely to farming, with access to water prioritized for irrigation. Citizens are given access to bigger water rations based on how loyal they are to the State (And Savateev specifically). 
August 3, 2002 - At a Alliance of Nations meeting, China is accused of industrializing Africa, offsetting all the hard work that the US, EU and USSR have done to curb emissions
2004 - To cut back on manufacturing costs, the USSR creates the “Standard People's Uniform”, an easy to make denim jumpsuit that is typically dyed red. 
Berlin Crisis - in 1998 USSR cuts all land routes to and from West Berlin, so it’s supplied by plane. In 2003 they invade while Federation is suffering
Second Greek Civil War - Greek is basically a puppet of EU as they rely on it and FulTec for food and water, FulTec rigs Greek elections to ensure PASOK stays in power. In 2004 KKE rebels and far-right militias also. USSR invades but EU sends forces over, almost causing a war. In 2007 agreement is signed for both parties to withdraw, Greece is left to itself and collapses over the coming years
April 8, 2005 - First reported case of Red Flu
Late 2000s - The Fall of the Warsaw Pact. The civil unrest in Eastern Europe leads to the USSR pulling out their support. 
January 2007 - The USSR begins constructing a massive border wall with China
2008 - Turkey is annexed by the Soviet Union, becoming the 19th Republic
Winter 2009 - Forests dying off en masse throughout Eurasia due to the combined effects of ancient plant diseases, wildfires, acid rain and drought
2010 - The Soviet Union adopts its fifth and final Constitution. This constitution is so repressive that it would cause even Stalin to blush. Freedom of Speech, Press, Assembly and Worship are all repealed. A citizen evading work for more than 3 days is to be executed for parasitism. Any Chinese-looking person outside of the Beijing District of Moscow is to be executed immediately. The Triumvirate is abolished with the General Secretary being the sole head of state (though in actuality the KGB operate everything from behind the scenes). All non-Soviet refugees can work for 10 years in a Siberian Superfarm to earn their Soviet Citizenship. Internally displaced refugees (such as from Central Asia, Central Europe, or the Caucasus) need only work for 1 year to regain their citizenship. Any westerner is to be shot on sight. The constitution also solidifies that it is through the guiding hand of the Supreme Minister that the country has weathered the worst of the extended crisis, so anyone who goes against the infallible policy of the Politburo will be shot on sight. 
2010 - The Shadow Civil War: Due to the compounding effects of climate change, civil unrest in Eastern Europe and the internal resettlement of large amounts of refugees, the USSR enters a civil war. The director of the KGB pits the General Secretary and the Supreme Marshall against each other and dissolves the Triumvirate. 
2011 - Massive famine causes the USSR to restructure itself into 8 “core republics”, with the remaining republics essentially being abandoned. 
Mid 2011 - Massive race riots from resettled peoples cause martial law to be enacted in Siberia, then the rest of the USSR. It is never lifted. 
2012 - Bastion Doctrine is established, officially leaving Eastern Europe to fend for themselves. 
2013 - A Red Flu outbreak in Moscow kills 3 million throughout the year. Also, as a result of the new “Core Republics” regime, ethnic tensions skyrocket further
2014 - The USSR military is estimated to be 33 million active personnel. The Soviet Military begins looking into using the newly unearthed plant diseases in biological warfare: the Politburo thinks of using it against China but they realize that China has no agricultural value left. This leads the KGB to conclude that China is recycling the dead for food, which is immediately lambasted and used for propaganda purposes. 
2015 - The USSR starts opening up “resorts” (more like public camping grounds) in the far north. Good workers can get treated to “vacation” lotteries
2016 - Renewed tensions between Kazakhs and Turkmens cause the Red Army to routinely comb gulags for signs of revolt
2020 - By this year, random KGB crackdowns happen almost constantly to keep the populace in fear 
2022 - A race riot in Moscow causes the Beijing Enclave to be destroyed
2023 - The USSR is still a nation, and is doing the best of the big four. Citizens don’t have to eat their own dead. You do your work, you are quiet and you keep your head down. Entertainment is mainly dancing and singing. Once a year, the citizens can go on vacation to the Arctic Sea. 
USSR - Specific Countries
Ukraine 
2006 - Ukraine, realizing that it is the breadbasket of the USSR, attempts a worker’s strike for better conditions. The Second Ukrainian-Soviet war ends with 35% of the arable land of Ukraine burned down and Ukraine being turned into a highly militarized police state, essentially one giant gulag. 
Ukraine is treated very similarly to Mongolia is treated by China
By 2023, Ukraine is an overindustralized wasteland, having long since lost its status as “breadbasket” with the advent of Green Siberia. 
Belarus
A majority of the rapid industrialization that took place in the 70s and 80s happened here
By 2023, the BSSR is the site of a massive border wall with Eastern Europe. 
Moldova
After the crash of 88, the MSSR has a resurgence of independence movements. This is crushed by the up-and-coming junior officer Savateev
By 2023, Moldova is treated much the same way as the Ukrainian SSR
Lithuania
In the 1980s, Lithuania imported several million Eastern Orthodox bibles. 
An uprising in 1982 is quickly crushed. 
In 2001, Lithuania attempts its own uprising. This is crushed by Savateev. 
By 2023, the Lithuanian SSR is home to an insurgent radical orthodox movement that aims to bring Lithuanian independence back to the forefront. The Red Army uses Lithuania as target practice for the inevitable Chinese invasion. 
Latvia 
Large factories were built here in the 80s. A majority of exported Soviet products were built in Latvia. The Soviet Union begins a deal with the Eastern Bloc to import workers and grant them citizenship. 
Latvia retains a large soviet military presence all the way up to the 2020s
Latvia’s land remains arable all the way to 2023, due to careful planning (read: luck) in the organization and ratio of farms to industrial/military sectors
Latvia would see a small tourist industry in the 1980s
In the immediate aftermath of the crash of 88, a small independence movement forms and is quickly crushed by the Red Army
Latvia is overall a pretty chill place by 2023 standards
Estonia
Finland and Estonia begin a trading relationship in the 1970s
Estonia becomes the main tourist hub of the Soviet Union in the 80s
A small uprising against Russification happens in 1987
Tourist destinations become collective farms in the late 90s
By 2023, Estonia is not quite as bad as Lithuania but not as good as Latvia
Uzbekistan 
During the Afghan Civil War, pro-Soviet troops are trained in Uzbek SSR
After the crash, the USSR had to put in more and more investment into keeping the Uzbek SSR afloat. 
In 2005, a water riot causes 243 deaths 
In 2009 the SSR’s supply of Nitrogen and Phosphate run out and with it the support of Moscow
From 1994-2010 the USSR begins a resettlement program for the Uzbeks that sends them to work in farms in the Krasnoyarsk Krai
In 2011, as part of the Bastion Doctrine, Uzbek SSR is officially abandoned by the Soviet Government. 
Kazakhstan 
In the 70s Kazakh SSR is intensively settled and industrialized 
Kazakh SSR is the first SSR abandoned, in 1999
Kyrgyzstan
In 1970, Agassi removes the Kyrgiz first secretary and replaces him with a Russian. This causes widespread unrest. The Red Army is called in and they deal with a small insurrection, but overall, it fizzles out by 1971. 
Most of its natural resources run out by 2005, and it becomes a dustbowl by 2008
The Soviet Union begins a resettlement program around the same time as the Uzbek one, and it goes very bad. 
Tajikistan 
In the 70s, Tajik SSR has civil unrest due to the Russification policies
In the 80s, Tajik SSR exports a lot of clothes for the USSR, and becomes rich as a result. 
In 2003, Tajik SSR tries to go independent. The USSR steps in to try to put it down, but get bogged down and eventually retreat in 2007. Think OTL Afghanistan 
Turkmenistan 
The USSR keep an iron grip on the turkmens 
In 1982, with the help of escaped Chinese Nationals, the very first Soviet Megafactory is built here
In 1984, there is a massive terrorist attack on the irrigation draining the Aral Sea
This combined with the Aral sea being destroyed leads to widespread ecological collapse in 1989. 
In 1990, the capital city, Poltoratsk catches fire and burns down along with the Megafactory and half a million people. 
In 1991, the USSR starts evacuation efforts
Georgia
In the 70s and 80s, the fight against corruption is more successful.
Because of Brezhnev’s death, the Georgian language being repealed is not impactful.
In 2003, seeing the Tajik SSR revolting inspires the Georgian SSR to revolt as well. However, Georgia has more natural resources so the Red Army squashes their rebellion with full force. 
In 2009, the Georgians rebel again, and the Red Army is forced to fight the insurgents all the way until 2011 when the Bastion Doctrine is enacted
Azerbaijan
Due to the nature of the Glorious Decades, Azerbaijan SSR gets really rich in the 80s
Of the three Caucus Republics, Azerbaijan sees the worst of it. Azerbaijanis are suppressed by the Soviets and worked to the bone. 
In 1992, a terrorist attack destroys a pipeline and causes a massive response from Moscow, who commit war crimes while the rest of the world is focused on the invasion of Taiwan. 
In 2001, Azerbaijan SSR’s resources dry up and the USSR stops subsidizing the industry. The pollution from Armenia has drifted over and significantly hampers quality of life. 
In 2003, the USSR starts subsidizing a resettlement program
Armenia 
In the 80s, Armenia gets super polluted along with Belarus. 
Anti-Azerbaijan race riots happen in 1987
The massive earthquake on December 7, 1988, causes the USSR to attempt to rebuild Armenia, but by 1991, it’s clear no country has the resources anymore. 
In the 90s, there are skirmishes between the Red Army and the natives like in the rest of the Caucuses
in 1995 the USSR offers resettlement to Siberia. 
The country is unofficially abandoned by Moscow on Jan 1, 2000, and officially on Jan 1, 2011. 
Warsaw Pact - Collapses in 2006
Albania 
Using their close ties with China, Albania became Chenist in 1973 after Hoxha is assassinated and a Chenist sympathizer is put in place
A SIZ is built in Albania in 1975
This caused Albania to try to get closer ties with the west in the late 1970s
Albania is among the first of the Eastern Bloc to open up in the 1980s
Mining during the Glorious Decades corrupt much of the land
In 1990, Yugoslavia invades them
In 1991, the Red Army invades them as Voronin and Savateev want revenge for their treatment of China. War lasts from 1991-1992 
The Red Army extracts much of the minerals by 2003
Albania becomes communist again and joins the People’s Coalition in 2007
Falls to civil war in 2011 - government tries to become capitalist again. 
By 2023, it is in anarchy
Bulgaria 
Participated in the Afghan Civil war on the side of the Soviets
Bulgaria worked its ethnic Turks to death in the megafactories
In 1989, the remaining turks rebelled and cause civil war. Yugoslavia attempts to invade at this time
In 1990, the turkish republic of Bulgaria petitions to join Turkey
Runs out of coal in 2014
Refugees from Turkey swarm the country in 2015, causing Bulgaria to invade Romania to get more living space
By 2023, it is a stalemate
Czechoslovakia 
After the Prague Spring, the KGB orchestrates ethnic tension between Czechs and Slovaks
Czechoslovakian culture flourished in the 1980s as cultural products were exported
Standard of living is good, comparable to USSR, because of cheap oil
Completely independent from soviet aid by 1986
In 1989, some Czechs wanted to split off and become fully independent Chenists. The Slovaks also wanted to split off but become communist again. They actually manage to split peacefully 
In 1993, Czechia petitions to join the EU but is rejected
In 2006, Slovakia forms an alliance with Poland for protection in exchange for food, Czechia offers to work for East Germany in exchange for food
In 2007, Czechia and Slovakia get into border clashes
Throughout the 2010s, Poland and Germany exploit Czechia and Slovakia and play them off each other
In the mid 2010s, Czechia joins East Germany and Slovakia is annexed by Poland
By 2023, Czechia is basically an industrialized wasteland but Slovakia is a giant farm for Poland
Hungary 
More successful economically in the 80s
Financially collapses in 1994
Civil War in 2000s - attempts to become communist again
Becomes very agrarian - makes bank from 2004-2008 selling surplus food 
Poland sends “peacekeeping” forces in 2008
Poland formally annexes Hungary in 2011 
Mainly serves as a breadbasket for Poland
East Germany 
In the 1970s, the main task is far more successful at winning citizens over
However, after the USSR recognizes West Germany as an independent state, this causes tensions between the two of them and East Germany starts to become neutral
DDR embraces their heritage as the birthplace of Marxism and develops their own distinct system, slowly removing any Leninist influence
DDR began a detente with West Germany in an attempt of wooing them over to Marxism
In the 1970s, the Coffee Crisis never happens because East and West Germany sign a trade deal 
Throughout the 80s, dissidents are sent to work penal labor in factories
In the late 80s, right before the Crash, East Germany begins to export goods and helps pay off its foreign debts
In 1981, DDR sends troops to Afghanistan
In 1991, Germany sends troops to Yugoslavia for “peacekeeping” 
From 1993-2003 Germany has a secret under-the-table deal with the USSR where they send resources from Yugoslavia to the USSR
In 2007, German-Soviet split after the Soviets refuse to help partake in an invasion of West Germany 
2008-2023 - East Germany gradually turns more and more fascist, morphing their ideology into eco-fascism
Using the environment, Germany starts enacting more and more draconian laws
East Germany takes over Czechia in 2015
Border clashes with Poland in 2010s cause ethnic tension
They’re pretty much nazis bro
Poland
Romania 
Sides with China in the 1970s
USA aids Romania after the earthquake of 1977
Industrializes much like Albania
Trade agreement with Turkey in 1980s
Large service industry created in 1980s
Rapid increase of standard of living (compared to Moldovan SSR)
Natalist policy out the wazoo inspired by Chen’s goal of 10 kids per family
Huge amount of homeless kids in 1990s, turn to street crime
Rationing in 1990s to pay off western loans
In 1996, a civil war breaks out and Romania becomes a corrupt oligarchy (much like modern Russia IOTL) 
In 2005, another civil war breaks out, this time by socialists
Romania is partitioned and annexed by Poland and Germany in 2019
New Eastern Bloc
Finland 
The USA and USSR had a proxy trade war in Finland in the 70s
Finland was attempting to join the EU in late 80s
In the 1990s, rationing is introduced but they make it out okay 
They attempt to join the Nordic Union in the early 1990s 
Invasion in 1997, annexed in 1999. 
By 2023, Finland is a giant farm with the rest of it converted into luxury high-rises for the Soviet elite
Yugoslavia
In 1990, tries to take over Bulgaria, Albania, and Greece. The USSR intervenes, and this is when China takes over Mongolia
In 1991, ethnic tensions explode, and Yugoslavia descends into a near constant state of civil war
Throughout the early 1990s, the USSR plunders the natural resources of former Yugoslavia
Afghanistan 
Annexed in 1989 
Drought, desertification and radiation made almost all arable land unusable in 1990, requiring the Soviets to support them with aid
Rebellion and strife cause the Soviets to gradually withdraw until 1997
Afghanistan falls into civil war in 1998 between islamic and soviet factions
total anarchy by 2010
By 2023 it is mostly abandoned 
Iran 
Annexed in 1989
Vast, uncontrollable fires devastated crop yields year after year
Radiation causes extreme cancer cases 
Abandoned by the soviets in 1992
Civil war from 1993-1999
Anarchy by 2009
By 2023 it is abandoned 
Turkey 
Military takes control in 1989
Turkey and the USSR are constantly at the brink of war throughout the 1990s
Takes over Bulgaria in 1998, Greece and Cyprus in 2004
In 2005 Turkey gets balkanized due to civil war 
Invaded by USSR in 2008, turned into a short-lived republic
After 2011, the USSR only controls Istanbul and their access to the Mediterranean 
Leaders of USSR
General Secretary 
Leonid Brezhnev (1964-1969)
Anton Agassi (1969-1982)
Gennady Yanayev (1982-1997)
Constantin Rutskoy (1997-2010)
Marshalls
Andrei Grechko (1967-1976)
Aleks Grigorev (1976-1982)
Demyan Petrov (1982-1988)
Ivan Voronin (1988-2015)
Director of the KGB
Yuri Andropov (1967-1982)
Yemelyan Fedoro (1982-1990) 
Sergei Savateev (1990-2034)

Mexico and Central America:

Mexico (Population of last census, 2000: 241,528,255)
Economic problems don’t happen in 1976 and 1982
The earthquake in Mexico City in 1985 is met with an international effort to rebuild 
The United States leads this effort, part of the reconstruction deal includes building a Mexican-American pipeline
After the crash of 1988, Mexico actually sees a very brief boom in economy due to its large oil supplies and the PRI manage to narrowly win in the July 1988 general election
The government operates business as usual which causes a huge uproar. The conservative government thinks that the depression is temporary
The massive demand for oil leads to Mexico extracting large amounts of oil and selling it at high prices. However, later that year and in 1990, oil demand crashes and Mexico’s oil company goes bust, leading to severe economic crisis
In 1989 President Graves tariffs most Mexican goods, leading to economic collapse. Mexico institutes reciprocal tariffs and a trade war begins. The policies are never reversed and anti-American sentiment sweeps Mexico. The PRI loses in part due to not being in touch with this, hoping Graves would reverse these policies after negotiation
In 1989, unemployment causes mass unrest, leading to riots in Mexico City 
This results in Edmundo Gutiérrez, a socialist in the PRD, receiving governorship of the state of Tabasco in a snap election. He campaigns on nationalizing the oil industry and creating jobs in the agricultural industry 
A terrorist attack destroys the Mexican-American Pipeline in 1989. 
In 1990, during the Hot Summer, Mexico is hit hard, with a massive migration from the northern states to the southern coastal ones, concentrated around Mexico City 
After tariffs destroy the rest of the economy, many states begin implementing similar reforms despite the government claiming that it is only temporary and that they are working closely with President Graves to resume trading
President Graves almost causes a war in 1991 when he says that he was elected to help America, not Mexico, and also (maybe) says some racist things
Throughout the 90s, cartels expand to make up for the collapse of the formal economy, and sell lots of drugs due to people being unemployed and depressed
In 1993, Governor Gutiérrez begins running for president. The PRI desperately tries to appeal to the average Mexican using nostalgia for the Glorious Decades, however they can’t compete with Gutiérrez’s policies, which have made the state of Tabasco the state with the best living conditions which have proved very popular with the public
Famines in 1993 and 1994 cause a dramatic shift to PRD as almost a million die of starvation over the course of a year. 
The Mexican Revolution of 1994: In 1994’s election, Gutiérrez wins in the biggest landslide in Mexican history, and with a majority of the politicians on his side, he enables sweeping reforms such as nationalizing every single industry, and implementing an American-style Universal Food Ration. Wealth redistribution programs give huge amounts of land to farmers, and those that refuse to give up their land are tried as enemies of the Mexican People. Government work programs are created to build housing for those displaced by climate change. 
In 1995, Gutiérrez officially renames the United States of Mexico to the Federation of Socialist Mexican States (Federación de Estados Socialistas Mexicanos). 1995-2000 are considered the “Golden Years” of Socialist Mexico, as the unemployment rate reached as low as 15% nationwide, and for those five years, homelessness was down to 0.1% and poverty was briefly eliminated. Mexico’s economy actually started rising, very slowly bro im sorry but this is Food, Incverse poverty will not be eliminated in this rip mexican plot armor If USA isnt doing it Mexico isnt doing it
In 1996, to deal with the growing food crisis, the Mexican Government creates the “empresa nacional de alimentos”, or the National Food Company
In 1996 and 1997, Vice President Smith and later President Smith would try to negotiate with President Gutiérrez for a lowering of tariffs and a renewed trade deal but was frequently rejected
In 1996, Mexico joins the Alliance of Nations
In the late 90s, in the depopulated northern states, corruption started to emerge. Backdoor deals and secret meetings between politicians looking to make ends meet and opportunistic black market dealers lead to the rise of organized crime in the emerging wasteland
In the late 90s, in the depopulated northern states, corruption grows rapidly as cartels take over the local governments. Collusion between desperate politicians and the cartels leads to their expansion in power and the rise of the black market there
In 1999 and early 2000, President Gutiérrez begins to investigate the reports of cartel activity in the north, leading to the creation of the Mexican People’s Army.
Throughout 2000 and 2001, large amounts of immigrants fleeing from the chaos in central and south America begin appearing on the border of Mexico. There are even some reports of African Americans fleeing from the Klan members in the Deep South
This immigration crisis ends up being one of the main talking points in the 2000 Election, leading to far-left Alejandro Ortega Ruiz to become President, campaigning on making Mexico for the Mexicans and to also stop the growing black market and drug cartels in the north. 
Mexico passes a strict immigration law in 2001, and then throughout 2002 President Ruiz engages in several operations leading the Mexican People’s Army against the cartels in the north
A massive riot in Mexico City in 2001 leads to the police being nationalized by the government, and vigilante groups begin appearing to deal with organized crime
In 2002 vigilante groups in the south begin to enact mob justice with the immigrants fleeing north into Mexico, resulting in the Tuxtla Gutiérrez Massacre of 2002. Over 50 people were found to be killed before the Mexican government intervened 
Due to climate change, immigration, drought and famine, more and more people are populated into Mexico City and the surrounding cities. This starts to cause a massive strain on resources despite the communist nature of the country. 
From 2003-2006, China works with President Ruiz to create jobs and revitalize the industry in Mexico. Unknown to the President, China is also working with the cartels, giving them a huge edge in the civil unrest. 
In 2004, unrest begins to grow in the Mexican People’s Army, dissatisfied with President Ruiz’s way of handling the country. The cartels begin to win more and more battles, and after the Battle of Durango results in a massive rout against the MPA, high ranking members of the army begin to plot a coup
In 2005, Hurricane Wilson devastates the coasts of Mexico leading to over 50k casualties
In 2005, Ricardo López Valdez, General of the MPA, involves Mexico in the politics of Belize by invading them for “peacekeeping”. The Mexican Armed Forces begin to be stretched thin between their southern border, the northern cartels and Belize
President Ruiz is narrowly re-elected in 2005 due to voter suppression and a divided oppositionMexico’s president can only serve one term and it’s in 6 year increments, so 1989-1995-2001-2007
In 2006, Valdez gets more and more support and launches a coup against the government and establishes a Junta in central Mexico, centered in Mexico City. In a twisted attempt to end the chaos and famines, he launches an invasion of Honduras 
In 2007, Valdez launches skirmishes against China in Guatemala. Meanwhile, the cartels control most of the north of Mexico. Valdez begins to control the press and flow of information to prevent the citizens from learning these devastating losses
Throughout 2008, members of Valdez’s government begin to defect to the cartels, some out of fear and some out of treachery and greed. Inspired by the changes to labor in the USA, the cartels begin to create farms using slaves to fund their operations
Valdez occupies the collapsed Guatemala in 2008 as it falls into civil war
In 2009, Valdez launches yet another invasion, this time of Nicaragua 
By 2010, the northernmost states in Mexico are in complete control by various Mexican cartels, with the last remnants of the MPA either defecting, surrendering, or retreating
The Purple Summer of 2011 leads to Mexico pulling out of Honduras and Nicruagua. This leads to a major famine with unconfirmed reports of cannibalism throughout the countryside
In 2012, Valdez is forced to focus on the cartel activity. Civil unrest against his junta begins to pick up, resulting in martial law being declared throughout the country. Valdez becomes deeply paranoid, and members parts of the MPA loyal to him begin arresting agitators for being “cartel members” 
In 2013, Mexico pulls out of Belize as the civil unrest spirals into a low-intensity civil war between forces still loyal to PRD, the MPA and Valdez, and the cartels, which are becoming far more chaotic and brutal. This leads to a record number of people fleeing the country, even going north into the USA, resulting in the El Paso Massacre that year
In 2014, cartels begin to splinter and fracture due to factionalism. Some of them take over southern Mexico, moving into places like Belize and starting to cause issues with leadership between cartels. 
In 2015, during the Great Heatwave, the cartels gain far more control as people take their drugs to escape the harsh reality. By 2016, outside of a few places loyal to Valdez, most of Mexico is divided up between various cartels. These cartel states are essentially labor-intensive superfarms that operate at night, with the population kept under control by malnutrition, drugs and force. Drugged workers are fed the corpses of their fallen with a slurry of vegetable paste
In 2016 and 2017, the cartels actually leave Valdez alone (they think he’s no longer worth it) to take over bits of central america for their growing operations, including Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica
In 2018, meddling from the Jarret Administration causes the Mexican cartels to fight each other, shattering their fragile alliance. Valdez’s Junta actually gains more power, liberating some communities in the south
In 2019, the entire northern parts of Mexico are so dry and hot that even the cartels abandon their night operations there, retreating to Baja California Sur and parts of Guatemala
In 2020, a heatwave and famine leads to the insane Valdez to repurpose the corpses of “agitators” into food
Much of Mexico’s population is either insane from drug abuse or weary from despair, leading to a huge increase in suicide bombings and brutally violent crimes. Entire towns become so drugged out that they fall into a coma and never wake up again
In summer 2021 it is leaked to the population of Mexico City that Valdez has been feeding the poor to the poor and a revolt occurs, killing Valdez in the process and leading to a mass exodus of people north. Many are captured by the Cartels and drugged and used as slave labor, while others make it north, leading to the Night War of 2021
Throughout 2021-2026, various revolutionaries and dictators take over the crumbling Mexican Junta, some of them tyrants and others traitors who work with the fracturing cartels before being deposed 
In 2022-2024, the biggest Mexican cartel invade and annex Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, and parts of Costa Rica
In 2025-2026 the cartels fracture further leading to several of them being absorbed by the others
In early 2027, a minor captain in the MPA controlled town of Chapata, engages in a mass poisoning operation against the biggest cartel and becomes the new dictator of Mexico City. 
In 2027 right before the Great Death, the captain in the MPA, now called the Generale, is gaining more and more ground from the North Cartel
Guatemala (Population of last census, 2000: 28,954,243)
Civil war goes on OTL until in 1973 Cuba stops supporting the insurgents and the US-China Peace Commission starts negotiating an end to the violence
This results in the department of Quiche being turned into an autonomous zone ruled by the indigenous Maya
However, poor negotiations result in more ethnic violence, leading to renewed conflict in 1975
This results in a UN mission into Guatemala in 1976 that leads to the US-backed regime being destroyed 
In 1977 and 1978, the UN mission holds a trial for the government but the US is left off the hook
In 1978, the new president pledges close ties to both Mexico and the United States
In 1979 and 1980, Guatemala begins building Chinese-style megafactories
In 1984, the new president begins forcing indigenous people to work in their factories. The rest of the population is fine with this due to the economy skyrocketing
In 1988 when both Mexico and the United states cut off trade, ethnic tensions resume
In 1989 the President declares martial law, and Cuba begins supplying the rebels once again
Throughout 1990 the rebels destroy factories, causing smoke to blow over into Mexico
In 1991, Guatemala invades Belize
In 1992 the rebels take Guatemala city 
In 1993-1999, in the south, rebels regularly execute European hispanics and have a very agrarian society. In the north, the remnants of the government constantly infight
In 2000-2007, China props up the north by giving it industrial support, which they use to wage war on the south and also each other
By 2008, the entire country collapses in Civil War yet again
By 2015, the country is in a feudal warlord era
In 2016, Mexican cartels move in to repurpose the Chinese machinery to mass produce weapons and later Bromista (Bromista is the drug that gives the Cartels so much power. In such a shitty world, escapism is very popular. Bromista is a combination of crack, LSD, and magic mushrooms, giving the user intense but usually pleasurable hallucinations)
In the 2020s, the populace is kept drugged and used as slave labor for the cartels
In 2027, Guatemala is basically a puppet of Mexico
Belize (Population of last census, 2000: 1,821,020)
In 1981, Belize becomes independent 
In 1982, the Belize Barrier Reef reports record bleaching
In 1988, Belize reports record poverty 
In 1991, after its clear that the UK is too busy, Guatemala invades Belize
Throughout the 90s, Guatemalan rebels aid Belize but because it’s so chaotic, cartels move in and start setting up drug rings
In 2005, due to flooding, the remnants of the government are driven out and the Mexican army invades for “peacekeeping” 
Throughout the 2010s, Mexican far-left forces and cartels battle for control
In 2013, Mexican forces pull out and Belize essentially becomes a cartel state
In the 2020s the populace is kept drugged and used as slave labor for the cartels
In 2021, the cartel puppet state of Guatemala officially annexes Belize, which is in turn a puppet of the Mexican cartels
In 2027, Belize is uninhabitable due to frequent hurricanes and intense rains preventing any agriculture
Honduras (Population as of last census, 1990: 18,903,743)
In the 70s, the economy grows far faster
In the 80s, after returning to civilian rule, Honduras works closely with the United Nations Anti-Drug Task Force
In 1984, the Soviet Union helps negotiate an end to the Marxist insurgency 
In the 80s Honduras is very dependant on trade with the US
In March 1988, this timeline’s version of Operation: Golden Pheasant happens, called Operation: Silver Turkey, and the focus is against cartel operations and not Contra
In 1988 after the Crash, Honduras experiences a revival of the Marxist insurgency, aided by Cuba
In 1989, this new leftist government is seen as ineffective, and to distract the population, Honduras starts a phoney war with El Salvador, blaming them for their economy and filling their country with drugs
In 1990, the Hot summer causes widespread rationing and the Marxists become more popular
In 1991, martial law is declared
In 1992, due to famine, Honduras removes the environmental protection in its national reserves and replaces them with intensive farming
In 1993, Honduras invades El Salvador. This fails and actually unites El Salvador against them, leading to a far-right military coup 
In 1994-2000, Honduras is in civil war conditions between far-right military groups, far-left revolutionaries, and drug cartels
In 2000, the cartels win out and the country devolves into a warlord state
In 2006-2007 the Mexican junta invades Honduras for intensive farming, claiming to be on the side of the Marxists
Because of the agricultural potential, Mexico (aided by Honduran collaborators) and the cartels fight over Honduras between 2008-2011
In 2011, a massive storm causes a huge military defeat for Mexico and they retreat
In the 2010s, Honduras is turned into one giant drug-growing operation
In 2014, fleeing refugees from Cuba attempt to stage a revolution in Honduras but they are quickly put down by the Cartels
In 2022, Mexican cartels officially annex Honduras as part of Mexico
In 2027, Honduras is thoroughly depopulated and the land is used to grow luxury crops (like coffee beans and bananas) for Cartel leadership
El Salvador (Population as of last census, 2000: 12,130,087) 
In the 70s, due to greater economic conditions, the Civil War is delayed
Crackdowns in the 80s lead to the military government barely holding on to legitimacy 
The depression in 1988 leads to protests and a coup in 1989
This leads to a civil war after the Hot Summer
In 1990-1993, the far-right junta fights against leftist guerillas aided by Cuba
But in 1993, Honduras invades. This manages to unite the warring factions and they quickly push them out
In 1994, the two factions try to peacefully rule El Salvador but the rebels break the treaty in 1995 and take San Salvador
The new leftist coalition government rules from 1995-2000, and is incredibly unstable and corrupt. Thousands die from famines and extreme weather. 
From 2000-2010, the civil war starts up again between the remnants of the Junta and the leftists. 
By 2011, the civil war has been so destructive that almost the entire country is incapable of supporting life, with the soil heavily damaged from the civil war, industrial run off, and rampant forest fires
In the 2010s-2020s, El Salvador is turned into a wasteland, with 99% of the population fleeing 
In 2020, the northern parts of the country are absorbed by Honduras 
By 2027, El Salvador has ceased to exist, with most of its citizens having forgotten about the country due to excessive drug use
Nicaragua (Population as of last census, 1990: 11,712,765)
The 1972 earthquake is just as destructive, however China and the USA help 
Part of the deal that USA and China made included reforms to open up the country more
In 1973, Somoza is deposed in a peaceful revolution
In 1974-1978, Cuba attempts to inspire guerilla uprisings but nothing comes of it, the citizens like the new system too much
In 1974-1980, Nicuarugua is transformed into a neo-liberal state with heavy investments from China and the US
In the 1980s, Nicaragua becomes the biggest exporter of coffee
After the crash of 1988, the country collapses rapidly 
In 1989, Marxist rebels, supported by Cuba overthrow the weakened government
In 1990, due to infighting and severe corruption, Nicaragua invades Costa Rica
In 1990-1993, the Costa Rica-Nicaragua War occurs. Due to the extreme poverty and infighting in Nicaragua, Costa Rica manages to win despite having a much smaller army
In 1994, Nicaragua collapses into warlordism 
In 1995, Costa Rican refugees fleeing from Colombia overwhelm the country
From 1995-2000, Nicaragua collapses into anarchy
In 2001, Nicaragua is annexed by Costa Rica
From 2002-2008, Nicaragua is turned into a giant cartel growing operation
After the storm of 2008, the central Cartel is packed into Nicaragua which is retooled to grow crops as well
In 2009-2011, Mexican marxists battle the Cartels but are unsuccessful 
In 2012-2015, infighting between cartel factions cause a civil war that ends in the Great Heatwave of 2015
In 2016, the Mexican cartels invade 
In the 2020s, despite frequent storms and high UV radiation, plus deadly humidity, Nicuraga is a major growing location for the Cartels
In 2027, Nicaragua is under control by the Cartels but just barely
Costa Rica (Population as of last census, 1990: 10,410,736)
In the 1970s, Costa Rica becomes extremely wealthy 
Carazo never becomes president and Costa Rica maintains its good relations with the US and the IMF
After the crash of 1988, the new president severs ties with much of the world
In 1989 and 1990, Costa Rica hangs on, implementing rationing and several social services
In 1990-1993, the Costa Rica-Nicaragua War occurs. Due to the extreme poverty and infighting in Nicaragua, Costa Rica manages to win despite having a much smaller army
In 1994, Costa Rica attempts to rebuild 
In 1995, Colombia, invading through Panama, takes over Costa Rica
In 1997, while Colombia is distracted, Cartels take over Costa Rica along with Panama
From 1997-2000, Costa Rica is reformed into a cartel state
In 2001, the Costa Rican cartel state takes over Nicaragua 
From 2002-2008, Costa Rica is the South American Cartel’s base of operations, thoroughly depopulated and turned into a series of walled, luxury cities
In 2008, however, a rebellion launched by indentured servants destroys many of the estates, and refugees fleeing from Panama cause a breakdown of Cartel order
From 2009-2017, Costa Rica is anarchy 
In 2017, trying to recoup their losses from the Great Heatwaves, Mexican cartels try to establish growing operations in Costa Rica
In the 2020s, Costa Rica is plagued by storms, with entire towns being destroyed 
In 2027 it is in anarchy 

South America: 

Panama (Population as of last census, 1990: 8,175,891) 
Panama is a military dictatorship following the coup in 1968
As part of the Shanghai Accords, China and the USA take joint control of the Panama Canal to facilitate free trade
Throughout the 70s, Panama becomes rife with corruption
Because of the decreased tensions in the cold war, during the 80s, the world pretty much just lets Panama be
In 1987, the Panama military attempts to stage an uprising due to the vast income inequalities
In early 1988, Panama becomes a UN protectorate 
After the Sinai War UN funds dry up and countries start recalling large amounts of troops
In 1989, the military launches a successful coup 
In the early 90s, the military engages in drug smuggling to fund their social security programs
By 1994, the Military is just as corrupt as the US-China occupation and causes a civil war
In 1995, during the civil war, Colombia invades and takes over the Canal
In 1997, Cartel members take over the Canal while Colombia is distracted by Brazil
A huge storm in August 2008 forces the cartels to abandon Panama and it falls into anarchy 
Throughout the 2010s, it is occasionally picked over by pirates, cartel members, and refugees 
In the 2020s it is uninhabitable during the day time due to high uv radiation 
By 2027, there are some warlords
Colombia (Population as of last census, 2010: 104,706,063) 
In the 1970s, because of the reforms in the Soviet Union and China, the far-left military groups are wiped out by the 1980s
As a result, the M-19 movement gets more prominence 
Throughout the 80s, the government and m-19 duke it out. This would result in a United Nations peacekeeping mission being established and Colombia’s drug lords not getting as much influence
Pablo Escobar is killed in a joint USA-USSR-PRC operation in 1986
After the crash, the far-right paramilities gain more power and take over the government in 1989, establishing a fascist state
In 1994, Colombia invades Venezuela and then Panama in 1995
In 1997, Brazil invades for living space
Between 1998-2000 Colombia fights back against Brazil but is conquered 
In 2002, the Cartels begin to gain more power against the overstretched Brazilian forces
The cartels begin further forays into Central America throughout the 2000s
In 2009, an uprising in a plantation causes a civil war that rips through Colombia
In 2011, massive storms along Colombia’s coast cause farms to fail 
By 2013, the civil war has devolved into anarchy and warlordism
By 2027, the country is in total anarchy
Venezuela (Population as of last census, 2010: 49,516,654)
In 1973, because of no oil crisis, Venezuela doesn’t have a rapid standard of living increasing 
But in 1983, it also doesn’t have a debt crisis. 
The OTL reforms in the 80s happen in the 70s, it diversified its economy and created lots of additional sectors 
After the crash of 88, Venezuela actually isn’t hit as hard as their large amounts of oil made them relatively independent to the doom spiral of resources. 
In 1990 though with the hot summer food shortages cause severe riots and social unrest
This leads to the government taking more and more drastic measures until in 1991 a riot blows up into full civil war 
In 1993, the civil war gets out of hand and turns into anarchy 
In 1995, Colombia takes over Venezuela for their oil 
In 1996, Brazil invades Venezuela from the other side to also get their oil, kicking out Colombia
This ironically gives the Venezuelans a cause to rally around and they launch a guerilla war against Brazil, funded by the USSR and later Argentina
The Venezuelan rebels launch several major operations in the areas occupied by Brazil. Major uprising include in 1999, 2002, 2005, 2009 and 2013. 
The uprising in 2002 destroyed the Venezuelan oil fields, causing heavy smog to blanket northern South America
Brazil still maintained their occupation as Venezuela had a large amount of arable land surprisingly
In the 2013 uprising, Brazil sent in a huge amount of their forces, this caused the rival military faction to take over and caused the Brazilian Civil War
In 2014 however the Cartels took over the arable parts of Venezuela and the rest of it devolved into warlordism 
In 2017 multiple uprising at cartel plantations caused the Cartels to abandon their holdings
In the 2020s it is under civil war conditions between Marxist revolutionaries and cartel-backed warlords 
By 2027, it is still under Civil War
Guyana (Population from last census, 2010: 1,883,086)
In 1978, due to the cultural stagnation in the West leading to further ennui, the Jonestown Massacre leads to over 2,000 deaths
The program of self-reliance works only until the 1978 when they give in and start free trade
The Sugar Strike in 1977-78 is met with US strikebreakers coming in and massacring the workers
As a result of the Sugar Strike and Jonestown Massacre, a violent coup in 1979 replaces the government of Guyana with a populist right-wing government
In the 80s, this conservative right-wing government tries to emulate the wealth of first-world countries by working with China to build mega-factories
Entire forests are logged, with almost the entire wilderness being cut down and exploited
In 1988, after the crash, public life nosedived and things like cooking oil, fuel, sugar and rice all became scarce and expensive 
This caused the economy to completely crash and the government to be upended in a violent revolt in late 1988
But in 1991, Venezuela would annex parts of Guyana 
Throughout the early 1990s, Guyana would become thoroughly depopulated from people fleeing the situation, famines, drought, extreme weather, and cartel violence. 
In 1995, Brazil invades Guyana and pacifies them for the most part. Members of the old corrupt government collaborate with the Brazillians in exchange for keeping their power
Guyana manages to keep a large amount of arable land, so the Brazillians use it as a breadbasket 
In 2009, a Venezuelan fighter group establishes cells in Guyana 
In 2014, monkeywrenching operations destroy the last remaining working farms in Guyana 
As a result of the Great Heatwave of 2015, Guyana’s agriculture cannot be revived and Brazil abandons them
After 2017, the Cartels establish a few bases but for the most part, Guyana is an arid wasteland 
By 2027, it is in a warlord state
Suriname (Population as of last census, 2010: 1,727,611)
Not really much happens. 
In 1980, the military coup is unsuccessful 
In 1981, the corruption and quality of life becomes so low that it’s considered a third world country, with many corporations donating to Suriname for tax cuts
After the Crash of 88, with foreign aid drying up, a far-left revolutionary group takes over in November 1988
This far-left government led to widespread anarchy and famine, forcing many to flee the country 
In 1992, Brazil invades them 
Throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, Suriname is one the territories that Brazil keeps a tight hold over, not because of the resources there but because the resistance is disorganized and impoverished 
In 2001, China begins building advanced mining facilities in Suriname 
Throughout the 2000s, the Chinese refineries poison the soil and begins to spill over into neighboring regions like Guyana and French Guiana
When the Chinese funds dry up in 2008, Brazil tries to keep the refineries running but run out of coal by 2012
A massive forest fire in 2013 causes Brazil to abandon Suriname
Throughout the rest of the 2010s, the Cartels occasionally use Suriname as a base
By 2027, Suriname is anarchy 
French Guiana (Population as of last census, 2000: 1,303,465) 
In 1970, refugees from Vietnam are settled here
In 1976, the Green Plan is far more successful 
The economic success of France in the Glorious Decades causes many independence groups to die down
After the Crash of 1988 though France struggles to keep French Guiana afloat before the Communist President of France relinquishes claims to it, calling it “imperialistic” 
A far-right military coup happens in 1990, after which Guiana devolves into feudal warlord state
Brazil invades in 1992 and makes them a breadbasket 
Brazil would hold onto them until 2005 when Venezuelan and Laotian refugees would organize a guerilla war against the Brazillians 
After the Great Heatwave of 2015, Brazil abandons them to anarchy and warlordism
After 2016, Cartels start to use Guiana for bases and plantations 
In 2019, Brazil attempts to reconquer them but the Cartels hold them off
By 2027, Guiana is still in a sort of feudal warlord state controlled by various cartels
Ecuador (Population as of last census, 2010: 37,049,097) 
The military Dictatorship collapses in 1972, being replaced by a far-left military junta
This junta nationalizes all the oil in Ecuador in 1973, however because of the lack of an oil crisis, this is far more successful than in OTL
In 1975, Ecuador peacefully transitions to a Civilian government, with elections held in 1976
In the late 70s/early 80s, Ecuador uses their oil revenue to create huge banana and cacao plantations, producing a vast majority of the world’s bananas during the Glorious Decades
As the oil booms shows no sign of stopping, and the US likes their bananas, their leader is not killed in 1981 
An earthquake of March 1987 results in widespread destabilization of the economy, forcing Ecuador to rely on domestic products more
In 1987, the Ecuadorian government takes out loans to help repair their infrastructure, with President King sending American engineers as a sign of good will (and keeping the oil flowing and bananas growing) 
After the crash of ‘88, due to the already declining economic situation, Ecuador wasn’t hit that hard. In 1989 and 1990, they make a lot of money selling oil and rationing isn’t introduced until the Hot Summer of 1990. 
In 1991, famines and drought cause widespread poverty, leading to a far-left government taking over in 1992. 
This government, despite claiming to have the people’s interests in mind, ends up capitulating to Brazil in 1993
Brazil exploits Ecuador's natural resources to create huge farms and mining operations 
Uprising in 1999
Ecuador's oil runs out by 2001
Brazil keeps a tight leash on Ecuador throughout the occupation
Ecuador manages to barely survive the 2015 Heatwave but crumbles during the 2016 one
Due to extreme weather events like storms and flooding, the coast and western half of the country in uninhabitable 
From 2017-2022, a faction of Brazil’s Junta holds on to the eastern half of the country and fights incoming revolutionaries from Colombia and Venezuela 
In 2023, Brazil retreats, and Ecuador devolves into civil war
As of 2027, it is still under civil war conditions 
Brazil (Population of non-occupied territories as of last census, 2010: 423,694,861)
The Dictatorship progresses as it does OTL until 1974, when the policies of “abertura” and “distensão” are much more successful 
Because there is no 1973 oil crisis, Brazil’s economy is pretty much fine for the most part
In 1977, President Morgan begins negotiations with Brazil to enact policies of democratization 
In 1978, due to the success of turning China capitalist and ending the Vietnam war and the detente in Korea, a military junta protecting the nation against communism is seen as unnecessary 
In 1979, the military government tries to assert themselves as the only thing keeping the country together and providing security, but with the growing drug trafficking operations, this is seen as obsolete 
In late 1979, the military attempts to engineer a coup during preliminary elections but is stopped by US observers
In 1980, overseen by President Morgan, the first free president elections are held
The president in 1980 runs on a platform of being harsh on crime
In 1981, working together with the United States, the UN and other countries, Brazil leads the charge in anti-drug trafficking operations 
In 1982, Brazil begins expanding their space program 
In 1983, after signing an exclusive petroleum deal with China, Brazil joins the International Station for Cooperation and Friendship
In 1984, China opens many industrial factories in Brazil’s southern region
In 1985, Brazil begins auctioning off huge swathes of the Amazon rainforest to logging companies
In 1986, Brazil participates in the operation to apprehend Pablo Escobar. The detective responsible for finding him is Brazilian. His name: Augusto Fernando César
In 1987, Brazil’s space program makes their first successful orbit
In 1988, Brazil begins working with the US to engage in drug busting operations throughout all of South America. This results in a massive militarization of Brazil’s police, and even their army is drafted to be extra forces 
In 1988, after the crash, Brazil desperately tries to maintain their power. The international drug busting alliance is broken up and various countries around Brazil fracture
In november of 1988, a populist centre-left politician, Ulysses José Franco, runs on a campaign of social services while also emphasizing trade with neighboring countries
In 1989, rampant corruption fueled by cartel operations cause the Franco administration to fracture and their social services to crumble
In 1990, during the summer, civil unrest grows as the population feels that the Franco administration is prioritizing the remnants of international trade. An orbital launch in November 1990 causes widespread protest from starving unemployed in Rio de Janeiro 
On January 20, 1991, the Sao Paulo massacre occurs. 
Capitalizing on this, opposition leader César Henrique Morales claims that the far-left model doesn’t work and that left-wing corruption is what allowed the drug problem to get so bad. He begins campaigning on a platform of ridding all crime, returning Brazil to its roots as an anti-communist dictatorship (hoping to get more aid from the west) and impeaching Franco
On March 15, 1991, the opposition impeaches Franco and the next day, the Brazilian Police, led by César, execute him on phoney drug charges. Throughout the next few weeks, Brazil’s government is restructured into a military junta.
On April 9, 1991, César Henrique Morales proclaims himself the civilian leader of Brazil, ruling in Sao Paulo, while Augusto Fernando César is proclaimed the military leader of Brazil, ruling from Rio de Janeiro 
CHM begins organizing “neighborhood watches” to be on the lookout for “argentine spies” or “drug runners”. AFC begins recruiting large amounts of Brazilians into the military with incentives of bringing safety to Brazil and stopping the spread of the Argentine insanity with the recent revolution in Uruguay 
From 1991-1992, Brazil invades Peru and North Bolivia
From 1991-1994, Brazil attempts to invade Paraguay
From 1992-1993, Brazil invades Suriname and French Guiana
From 1993-1994, Brazil invades Ecuador
From 1993-1995, Brazil attempts to invade South Bolivia but is stopped by Argentina
From 1995-1996, Brazil invades Guyana
From 1996-1997, Brazil invades Venezuela
From 1997-2000, Brazil invades Colombia
With South America effectively divided between far-right Brazil and far-left Argentina, Brazil calls themselves the Empire of Brazil
From 2000-2007, Brazil takes a break from conquering countries to focus on their domestic issues such as rampant power outages. Working with the Chinese (in secret), Brazil invests heavily in mining and energy production
In 2005, in a sort of twisted form of dehumanization, Brazil begins feeding leftists their own dead
In 1999, Ecuador would launch an uprising
In 2002, Peru would launch an uprising
In 2005, Guiana would launch an uprising
In 2009, Brazil loses control of Colombia due to civil war, desertification, and Venezuelan guerillas  
In 2010, during their last census, the total population of the Brazilian Empire is 688,030,405
In early 2013, Venezuelan rebels would assassinate a visiting Augusto Fernando César and cause the Brazilian Civil War due to the military/police and César Henrique Morales not being able to agree on a successor 
As a result of pollution from Chinese machines and the creeping effects of climate change, more and more civilians end up joining far-left guerilla groups
In late 2013, a forest fire causes Brazil to abandon Suriname
In 2014, Peru’s Pro-Brazil governor is overthrown and Brazil is only able to keep the northern half
In 2015, Brazil abandons Guyana and French Guiana due to the first Great Heatwave
In 2016, Brazil abandons the western half of Ecuador
In 2017, Brazil begins losing core provinces to far-left rebellions and cartel operations and on July 7, 2017 César Henrique Morales is killed by his own men
In the more rural areas of Brazil and occupied Peru and Ecuador, the far-right military government remains strong while the rural areas in the east are gradually taken over by far-left militias
In 2019 Brazilian soldiers resort to cannibalism due to being cut off from supply lines
In 2018 Argentina begins supplying the rebels with guns and materials 
In 2022 the situation in Brazil gets even worse when Cartels invade from the ruins of Colombia and Venezuela
In 2027 Brazil is still under civil war
Peru (Population as of last census, 2010: 68,149,568)
The military dictatorship happens as OTL
In 1973, China and the USA work together to negotiate with Peru’s military dictatorship and lead them away from communism 
This results in the military dictatorship being overthrown in 1974, and leadership being returned to civilian rule
In 1975, the government, with the help of the CIA, begins rounding up and executing suspected leftists 
In 1976, China signs a lucrative minerals deal with Peru and begins revitalizing their economy
In the 80s, far-left revolutionary groups and cartel operations begin to cause internal conflict in Peru
In 1981, China begins aiding the government of Peru in eradicating the Maoist insurgency 
The Paquisha War never happens
Peru lasts a bit longer, but in 1988, hyperinflation catches up to them 
In late 1988, the Shining Path takes over the government 
Throughout 1988 and 1989, the Shining Path government creates widespread land reform and lynches powerful members of corporations and the government. The civilians are kept in check through fear and rationing
In 1990, the Hot Summer destroys the agriculture of Peru and causes widespread famine
In March 1990, the Shining Path breaks apart into several factions and launch civil wars on each other
In mid 1991, the newly formed dictatorship of Brazil launches an invasion of Peru 
The remaining people who escaped the purges welcome the far-right Brazilian government, and collaborate in ruling Peru 
In 1992 Peru is formally annexed by Brazil and becomes several states
Through strict rationing and intensive agriculture, Peru avoids famines throughout the 90s and Brazil invests heavily in mining operations
In 2001, a massive forest fire cause many farms to be burnt down 
In 2002 an uprising led by Venezuelan rebels causes Brazil to crackdown hard
In the mid 2000s, as the land gets more and more exploited by pollution, drug smuggling starts to become prevalent 
In 2009, the mining operations end because Brazil no longer has working equipment to extract resources 
In the 2010s, extreme weather and famines cause people to abandon the coast 
In 2013, with the start of the Brazilian Civil War, Peru is left to their own devices
In 2014 the pro-Brazil governor is overthrown and Peru devolves into civil war between far-left hyper maoists, far-right pro-Brazil fascists and exploitive cartels wanting to make a quick buck
In 2017, Argentina intervenes on behalf of the leftist faction 
In the 2020s, the war become Argentine-backed leftists fighting cartel members
In 2025, Argentina withdraws their support and Peru collapses into warlordism
By 2027, it is still in warlordism 
Bolivia (Population as of last census, 2020: 22,423,731)
In the 1970s goes the same as OTL with the Banzer coup in 1971
In the 1970s, oil and metal exports go up
Banzer is pressured by Morgan to hold elections
The first elections are held in 1978 and the right-wing military faction maintains a tenuous grip 
Throughout the 80s, multiple factions of the military orchestrate coups: two in 1979, one in 1980, two more in 1981, and another in 1982, then one last one in 1983. These alternate between far-left and far-right regimes
Things get so bad that the UN is forced to intervene in 1983 and create the Bolivian Mandate
The US, Europe and Canada work together to design a new system of government for Bolivia. 
This new government includes free-market capitalism introduced in a gradual way, and involved the provisional government taking out huge loans 
The first truly free elections are held in 1985 and the right-wing civilian conservative faction wins
Bolivia is considered one of the poorest countries in the world pre-1988
After the Crash of 88, Bolivia immediately collapses into civil war with far-left and far-right factions attacking UN peacekeepers who eventually leave during a diplomatic crisis in late 1988
Bolivia devolves into anarchy in 1989
In 1990, the anarchy resolves itself into a far-right fascist state in the north and a socialist far-left state in the south
In 1992, Brazil takes over the northern half of Bolivia
In 1993-1995 Brazil attempts to take over the southern half of Bolivia but is unable to attack their strongholds in the mountains 
In 1996, South Bolivia makes a pact with Argentina exchanging minerals (mainly lithium) for food
From 1992-2017 Brazil holds on to North Bolivia until Argentina takes it from the crumbling Brazilian Empire
In 2001, South Bolivia formally petitions to join Argentina
From 2001-2007 China helps set up mining equipment. These machines are extremely inefficient and damage the water table
In 2008 water pollution causes droughts in South Bolivia 
In the 2010s, Argentina invests heavily to keep Bolivia functioning 
In 2021, with the drought and water situation only getting worse, Argentina significantly scales back their operations in Bolivia though still occupies them 
As of 2027, Bolivia is the most unstable part of Argentina, with cartels and far-right Brazilian paramilitaries attacking every once and a while 
Paraguay (Population as of last census, 2020: 12,210,755)
Paraguay retains good relationships with Brazil and the US
President Morgan continues to send military aid to Paraguay to help them catch rebels and communists
In the 80s though this causes widespread corruption and drug trafficking to skyrocket
In the 80s, Paraguay has the highest income inequality in the world
In 1989, Graves cuts off all aid to countries, including Paraguay, and this causes the government to almost completely collapse
In 1989, Brazil attempts to keep Paraguay afloat with aid as they don’t want the “Argentine Mistake” to spread
Argentina however sends more aid to Paraguay, and this causes the two of them to maintain closer ties
In 1991, the new far-right Brazilian government attempts to annex Paraguay and set up a neutral buffer state between them and communist Argentina, but Argentina comes to their aid and helps defend them against Brazil
The Paraguayan War lasts from 1991-1994, and ends with Brazil retreating to invade their northern neighbors. 
From 1994-1999, Argentina heavily fortifies the border with Brazil, building a huge wall and mining the border
Throughout the late 90s, Argentina helps establish leftist governments which eventually join Argentina as an autonomous region in 2000
Due to Paraguay’s pre-1988 economy being mainly focused on black market trade and smuggling, their agricultural sector was minimal
Argentina builds lots of factories in the 2000s
In the 21st century, Paraguay is mainly used as training grounds and for industrial plants
Chile (Population as of last census, 2020: 41,197,488)
In the 1970s, Chile’s left-wing government succeeds as OTL
However, as part of the Shanghai Accords, the US isn’t allowed to overtly overthrow the Marxist president 
Instead, Chile was the subject of immediate and harsh sanctions, only receiving aid from places like Cuba and the USSR
The US wouldn’t have to wait long as Pinochet gained power just like OTL
The sanctions would still continue into the 1980s, when negotiations were entered and trade deals were reached in exchange for a return to a democracy 
In 1984, elections were held and a coalition of right-wing conservative politicians took over, coincidentally many of them were in Pinochet’s cabinet 
Throughout the 1980s this new government would carry out human rights violations in the guise of “anti-terrorism operations” and combating drug smuggling
In 1988, during the federal elections, it was revealed that they were tampered with when the conservative majority mysteriously won in a landslide despite the overwhelming popular support for the center-left candidate 
This turns into a military coup yet again, and while the far-right military government attempted to consolidate power, a far-left communist insurgency, aided by the USSR, starts to fight back
In 1990 during the Hot Summer, the far-right government gets defeated by the communist rebels 
In 1992, Chile makes an alliance with Argentina
In 2000, the Marxist government negotiates with Argentina to become an autonomous province 
In 2001-2005, China works with Chile to access resources but gives up due to extreme weather
By 2027, the Chilean Autonomous Region, despite being frequently beset with extreme weather, is actually a pretty chill place to live. Careful allocation of resources has kept soil mostly pollutant free and mining steady. 
Uruguay (Population as last census, 2020: 6,500,562)
In the 1970s, the far-left militias are less violent
This results in no military dictatorship, but the authoritarian civilian regime is supported by the United States to take out leftists
With no far-left terrorism, the attempted military dictatorship has a lot less legitimacy and public support
Because of no 1973 oil crisis, the economy gets better and in 1974 the authoritarian regime transitions to a democracy 
Modelling themselves on the USA, they begin privatizing large amounts of the government functions and social services in 1977
To help make their country seem more attractive to foreign businesses, Uruguay’s government began to sell out key positions to foreign investors. Companies could buy out the public transportation policy of a city, for example
In the 1980s, Uruguay becomes an experiment on minimalist government, with the state pretty much only providing security 
As such, tons of businesses move their headquarters to Montevideo
But with such an increase of wealth inequality comes crime: throughout the 1980s, drug trafficking (blamed on leftists) is common, with the UN engaging in an official Drug-Bust operation in 1984
In 1988, after the crash, the government is taken over by a bunch of organized crime syndicates, which hoard all the remaining food for themselves and their guards
In 1988-1989 Brazil supports this regime
In 1990, during the Hot Summer, things get so out of hand that the population explodes in a violent uprising. 
In 1991, aided by Argentina, a left-wing government takes over and begins massive wealth redistribution programs 
Uruguay's transition to a left-wing government alarms Brazil, and this spurs them to become a far-right dictatorship 
In 1991 Argentina sends the left-wing government military supplies, and joins Argentina to help defend Paraguay 
In 2000, around the same time as Paraguay, Uruguay joins Argentina as an autonomous region
The Brazilian-Uruguayan Border is heavily patrolled by both Argentine and Uruguay troops, with a large navy presence 
In 2014, Argentina would launch an invasion of weakened Brazil through Uruguay, taking over the states of Rio Grande Do Sul and Santa Catarina, which were added to Uruguay's territories in 2017
In the 2020s, Uruguay is hit by several famines and Argentina is forced to reduce their rations 
In 2027, Uruguay is able to still produce a lot of crops
Argentina (Population of core territories, after last census, 2020: 94,178,752)
Peron resumes power in 1974
In this timeline, due to the lack of an oil crisis, Argentina’s economy isn’t so bad in the 1970s
Peron doesn’t die in 1974, his heart attack and signs of pneumonia are caught early 
Peron dies in 1979 a national hero, and his third wife, Isabel, learned from his governing style and is more competent as a leader
One of the tenets of Peronism is neutrality and non-alignment, and as such Argentina abstains from allying themselves with the USSR or the USA/China
Isabel Peron rules from 1979-1982, after suffering from a heart attack and retiring from public view
In 1982, there is no Falklands war (maybe) and Alfonsín becomes president, campaigning on a more conservative, center right version of Peronism
Throughout the 1980s, the USSR and USA both try to woo over Argentina to their side of the economic spectrum. 
Argentina joins the non-aligned movement and creates several treaties and trade deals with Yugoslavia and India, this results in modernization of their factories 
Argentina resists the entire time all the way up to the crash of 1988
In 1988, the new president, Carlos Vicente Luis, campaigns on a platform of far-left Peronism with an emphasis on Latin-American unity
With Argentina not partaking in the free trade of the Glorious Decades and also being energy independent (Argentina has a huge amount of natural gas) they aren’t hit that bad by the Crash of 1988, instead getting only a recession 
In 1989, inspired by both the USA and the USSR, Argentina begins the rationing of petroleum and other energy sources
In 1990, after witnessing the Hot Summer and the chaos that was happening around the world, the President of Argentina makes the initially controversial decision to enact more left-wing policies including the nationalization of all companies and implementing a food ration
In 1991, after seeing the chaos in Uruguay, the government sends aid to them. Seeing the growing fascist nature of Brazil, Argentina puts their military on standby, expecting to see an invasion through their border with Brazil. Instead, Brazil invades through Paraguay 
In 1992, Chile and Argentina sign a pact of mutual defense and economic cooperation
From 1991-1994, Argentina, Uruguay and Chile fight Brazil in the Paraguayan War. Argentina sees a record number of citizens enlist in the war effort, and the government frequently parrots propaganda that Argentina is one of the few sane countries left. This sees a record rise in nationalism and patriotism
In 1994, the President, Alfredo José Falcón, elected platforms on a campaign of Peron-style socialism and South American unity
In 1994, when Argentina drives off Brazil from Paraguay, this is a huge morale boost and shows that even such a big country can be defeated by a much smaller one. It also makes many think that it proves left-wing economic models are better than right-wing ones. The USSR congratulates them in their victory against Brazil
In 1996, South Bolivia makes an alliance with Argentina
In 1994-1999, Argentina helps rebuild Paraguay and set up fortifications along their border with Brazil and also begins to establish more left-wing style governments in Paraguay
In 2000, the new openly communist president, José Lorenzo Ramos, works with Paraguay, Uruguay and Chile to make them autonomous regions so that they can better survive the climate crisis. This new president says that the previous administrations didn’t go far enough and that only together can they hope to survive in the new millennium 
In 2001, South Bolivia becomes the next autonomous region of Argentina and the country officially reforms itself as the Democratic People’s Republic of Argentina. In 2001, when the country is formed, the population is 144 million
In 2003, Argentina joins the Alliance of Nations
Throughout 2001-2007, DPR Argentina cautiously works with China to retool their mining operations in South Bolivia and parts of Chile, mainly to mine coal as Argentina’s natural gas is running out
In 2005, a massive tropical storm forces China to abandon their operations in Chile
In 2006, Ramos wins a second term, and platforms to modernize the military. With the Warsaw Pact recently dissolved, they negotiate with Central Europe to buy several old warships
In 2007, Argentina officially severs ties with China and makes an alliance with the USSR
In 2008, after China has left, Bolivia’s water table becomes noticeably polluted which turns into a decades-long drought 
In 2012, the new president, Roberto Horacio Fernández, campaigns on a platform of collaborating with the USSR to modernize their energy. The USSR is reluctant, and only offers minimal support due to the long distances. In 2013, Voronin sends a few scientists to help push the Argentines in the right direction
In 2014, Argentina launches an invasion into weakened Brazil through Uruguay. The territory gained is eventually granted to Uruguay
In 2015, 2016 and 2019 famines due to heatwaves kill an estimated 25 million people total
In 2017, North Bolivia is taken over by Argentina
In 2018, Marina Santiago Roca, the second female president of Argentina, comes into power. She develops a nuclear program
In 2020, the total population of Argentina and her autonomous territories is 176,511,288
In 2021, Argentina begins pulling out of Bolivia
In 2022, Argentina begins colonizing the newly melted west Antarctican ice sheet
In 2023, Argentina organizes evacuations of parts of Chile and Bolivia
In 2024, Roca gets a second term and platforms on a campaign of expanding women’s rights, legalizing abortion for all women in the DPRA
In 2025, spillover from the Brazilian Civil War reaches Argentina and thus President Roca drafts more soldiers
In 2026, Argentina begins constructing a border wall
In 2027, Argentina is gearing up to wipe out Brazil once and for all

Island Nations: 

Cuba (Population as of last census, 2010: 22,190,622)
In the 70s, Cuba is skeptical of free trade and follows the USSR
However in 1983, with Agassi no longer in power, they are pressured to open up free trade. 
A trade deal in 1984 lifts the trade embargo and visa-free trade leads to a major exchange of ideas and culture from the USA and Cuba, and a huge tourism boom
Cuba withdraws from Angola in 1985
The Rectification Process of 1986 results in a huge service industry popping up in Cuba
In 1988, it all comes crashing down with Graves ending the trade deal. The Soviet Union attempts to keep Cuba afloat from 1989-1990 but soon it becomes too expensive and by 1991 Cuba is essentially on their own
In 1989, Castro gets very dictatorial and involves Cuba in wars again, including supplying Guatemalan rebels, Honduran Marxists, El Salvadoran Rebels, and Nicaraguan Guerillas 
In 1990, Castro takes over Guantanamo Bay and seizes all the US’s military equipment there. The soldiers are evacuated in secret by the Graves Administration but any involvement with Guantanamo Bay is covered up
In 1993 however, due to resource shortages, Cuba suspends all their operations in Latin America and becomes a hermit kingdom much like North Korea
In 1994-1997 strict reforms in rationing and population control leads to Castro barely holding on to power. A two-child policy is introduced in 1994. Martial law is declared in 1995, and penal labor is implemented in 1996. The country completely runs out of energy by 1997, leading to most lights being wood-burning fires
In 1998 and 1999 large storms in the Caribbean cause large amounts of refugees to flee to nearby Cuba where they are turned away by the Cuban navy
In 1998, due to resource shortages and allocation of farm land, livestock are made illegal and after 2000 eating meat is declared illegal. Then in 1999 the two-child policy is reduced to a one-child policy. Forcing everyone to be vegan, combined with the strict population controls, actually prevents any major famines
In 2000 the census estimates the population is sitting at a “stable” 20 million, mainly concentrated between Havana and Camagüey
In 2000, when China comes around, Castro almost declares war on them but instead only fires a warning shot
In the 2000s, constant tropical storms wear down the Cuban coast, leading to a policy of “declaring war on the winds” and building underground 
In 2001 storms and flooding cause much of the northern archipelago to be abandoned 
In 2002 a massive hurricane devastates Havana, leading to the capital of Cuba being moving to Camagüey
In 2003 a massive uprising from penal workers leads to the entire island of Isla de la Juventud to be abandoned by the government, devolving into anarchy
In 2004, the cramped conditions in the Santa Clara-Camagüey Corridor lead to an outbreak of cholera. The Cubans manage to keep the losses at only under 1000 but at huge material cost: alcohol is temporarily made illegal so it can be used to sanitize the cramped cities
In 2005, Cuba is almost destroyed by Hurricane Wilson. Fidel Castro is incapacitated and his brother takes over running the country. Most of the coastal cities on either end of the main island are abandoned due to flooding, and fall to anarchy and warlordism. Leaving a city requires a license. 
In 2006, Cuba begins a “national water reclamation” project, using chemicals to make rainwater safe for human consumption. Unfortunately, as a side effect, the chemicals make the water unsuitable for irrigation and leads to a minor famine later that year
In 2007, the country almost collapses into civil war but Fidel Castro manages to use his charisma to keep it together
In 2008, in a last ditch effort, the Cuban navy begins secretly raiding the ruins of islands in the Caribbean, using penal labor to scavenge for supplies, namely building materials, food, and electronics
In 2009 the situation gets slightly better, with the increase in material from the navy expeditions allowing for a marginal reduction in rationing and for reinforcing the remaining infrastructure 
In 2010 anarchists from the coasts and cartel members begin to encroach on the government territory, leading to a draft. The new recruits are notorious for deserting, easily swayed by the mind-altering drugs of the cartels
In 2011, the Red Flu makes its way to Cuba from cartel members. This results in the entire city of Santa Clara being quarantined, Fidel Castro dying from Red Flu, and the remnants of Cuba falling into civil war
From 2011-2014, the civil war rages on, deteriorating into warlordism and then finally anarchy. Cartels attempt to establish bases on Cuba but are driven out by the extreme weather. Civilians attempt to escape and usually end up being slaves in Central America, being killed by Klan members, or die at sea
In 2015 and 2016, during the Great Heatwaves, the last of the vegetation above ground dries up, forcing the remaining survivors further underground
From 2017-2027, Cuba is an abandoned wasteland. Scavengers and pirates occasionally pick over the ruins but are always driven out by the storms. An isolated network of PCC bunkers maintain contact but due to flooding and soil erosion, by 2027 only one of these bunkers remains
Antigua (Population as of last census, 1990: 214,714)
In 1976, the economic reforms are more successful and Antigua becomes a major vacation destination. 
They become independent in 1981 and join Bermuda. 
In 1988 after the depression and the end of tourism Antigua tries to become a tax haven but that doesn't work. 
In 1990 the president declares himself dictator. This causes a civil war that fizzles out into anarchy by 1992. 
By 2000, due to constant and powerful storms, the island is abandoned. 
Dominican Republic (Population as of last census, 1990: 20,882,615)     
In the 70s, tourism and international trade skyrocket
In 1979, Hurricane David results in only minor damage. It is quickly fixed by taking out loans from the IMF
In the 1980s economic issues don't happen and Guzmán doesn’t off himself
In 1988, after the crash, civil unrest from Haiti result in the Dominican Republic declaring war on their neighbor
In 1989, this fizzles out into a civil war
The Hot Summer of 1990 causes severe resource shortages and plunges the country into anarchy 
By 2000 the country is abandoned 
By the 2020s, much of the country is flooded
Bahamas (Population as of last census, 1990: 609,276)
Becomes independent in 1973 as in OTL. 
However, due to the inherent corruption of the PLP, in 1976 the country falls to a peaceful revolution backed by the USA.  
Immigration causes a boom in their economy, leading to a massive service industry and being the largest tourist destination in the 80s
The crash of 1988 leads to a military coup in 1989, and a reverse of the immigration situation: many tried to flee to America and Haiti due to the flooding
In 1990, part of the Hot Summer causes a massive tropical storm that destroys Nassau and creates a civil war
Throughout the 1990s, the Bahamas are depopulated 
By 2000 the islands are abandoned 
By 2027 the entire country is 2 meters below sea level (but just barely, the ruins of buildings still poke out into the sea) 
Barbados (Population as of last census, 1990: 478,911)
Tourism industry and economy skyrockets in the 1970s
The agricultural industry is destroyed in the 80s
After the crash of 1988, the economy dries up and the government goes bankrupt
In 1989 and 1990 law and order break down across Barbados, with the wealthy leaving for places like the USA
The Hot Summer of 1990 causes a humanitarian disaster as the poor bake in the heat 
In the 1990s the island is thoroughly depopulated and falls to warlordism between various pirate factions 
By 2000 the island is mostly abandoned due to international shipping disappearing 
By 2027 the island is 0.5 meters underwater
Dominica (Population as of last census, 1980: 128,519)
Gains independence in 1978 as in OTL
Hurricane David is much less destructive in 1979
Because of this, the economy skyrockets in 1980 with tourism exploding
No coup happens in the 80s
In 1988 after the crash the military takes over 
However in 1989 a massive hurricane destroys 90% of the island’s infrastructure and leads to over 90k deaths due to the lack of a coordinated disaster response 
In the 1990s the island is completely depopulated 
By 2027 the island is 1 meter under water with heavy winds destroying the buildings
Grenada (Population as of last census, 1990: 223,680)
Gains independence in 1974 as in OTL
In 1979 the communist coup happens just like OTL
However Bishop remains in power, and there is no military coup in 1983
Instead, in 1983, the USSR and Grenada begin talks about opening the country up to free trade
In 1983-1988 the economy slowly opens up to foreign investment but Bishop remains cautious 
In 1988, after the Crash, Grenada immediately begins a system of rationing and cuts off all exports. This is followed by making an alliance with Cuba
From 1988-1993 the Cuban-Grenadan pact keeps Grenada functioning but just barely 
In 1989 a ration protest leads to over 25 dead
In 1990, the Hot Summer causes a famine, and Grenada relies heavily on Cuban supplies to keep themselves functioning. An estimated 3500 people die from starvation 
In 1991 Bishop dies leading to a power struggle between his military commanders, but they sort it out quickly to continue receiving aid from Cuba
In 1992, due to deteriorating conditions springing from extreme weather, the military government of Grenada begins negotiations with Cuba about evacuating their citizens to Cuba. Elite members of the government are slowly evacuated 
In 1993 Cuba abruptly cuts off the aid and evacuation efforts, leading to the facade of order in Grenada crumbling into anarchy and warlordism
Grenada lasts a little bit longer than their neighbors, and a small amount of their population manages to escape to Martinique 
By 2004 the island is mostly abandoned and Hurricane Wilson destroys the last vestiges of civilization in Grenada 
By 2027 Grenada is 1 meter under water 
Haiti (Population as of last census, 1980: 22,978,143)
In the 70s and 80s, despite the rampant corruption, the country remains a popular tourist destination
Jean-Claude Duvalier’s wedding to a mixed race woman in 1980 isn’t as controversial and is actually celebrated
After the crash of 1988, Jean-Claude Duvalier runs away to the USA and leaves the country behind which falls into civil war
This leads to a border dispute in 1989 that results in the Dominican Republic invading Haiti, however they are just as unorganized as Haiti’s military and collapse into civil war
The Hot Summer of 1990 plunges the country into anarchy and warlordism
Storms throughout the 1990s cause many to flee 
By the 2000s most of the country is abandoned 
However by 2027, much of the Haitian side of the island is still above water, and occasionally cartel members pick through the ruins
Jamaica (Population as of last census, 1980: 4,936,655)
In 1972 Shearer isn’t defeated
The USA works with Jamaican authorities to eradicate the reggae movement. People like Bob Marley are arrested on grounds of “cultural crimes” and “adjacent communism” 
In the 1980s Jamaica is a big tourist destination with a huge service industry
After the crash of 1988, Jamaica rapidly transforms into a totalitarian marxist society in a violent revolution, with American tourists being held hostage in August 1988. President King’s VP personally went to Jamaica to negotiate with them, however he is delayed due to weather. 
In September 1988, a colossal storm devastates Jamaica, killing almost the entire population as a result of landslides, building collapses, drowning and chemical exposure
In the immediate aftermath, the United States evacuates the survivors (being only 4,963 people) 
Jamaica is completely abandoned by 1989, though throughout the 90s rebels, pirates and cartel members would occasionally stop on the island
By 2000 the island is so devastated by constant storms that it’s uninhabitable 
By 2027 most of the island is still above water, with only minimal land loss due to sea level rise
Saint Christopher-Nevis-Anguilla (Population as of last census, 1990: 76,362)
Independence succeeds as in OTL
However after the crash of 1988, due to the rapid economic decline, the countries petition to join the UK again but are rejected. Instead they form a federation between the three of them
The federation lasts for less than a year as civil unrest, resource shortages and a breakdown of law cause a civil war in 1989
However, in a rare case of humanitarianism in the Food, Incverse, the ruling Junta in 1990 orders the mandatory evacuation of all three islands and they land in Venezuela who are actually pretty chill with them, initially 
By 2027 most of the islands are under water
Saint Lucia (Population as of last census, 1990: 295,211)
Independence succeeds as in OTL
Hurricane Allen isn’t as strong in 1980 and Saint Lucia remains relatively prosperous with lots of tourists
Banana exports also increased during the 1980s
After the crash of 1988, rationing is introduced and exports are ceased
In 1989 and 1990, the government gets slowly more authoritarian and suspends elections
The Hot Summer of 1990 causes civil war to break out, and the fighting destroys crops and causes a famine
Throughout the 1990s the civil war deteriorates into warlordism and finally anarchy 
A hurricane in the late 90s forces the survivors to leave
By 2010, the island is completely abandoned 
By 2027, the island is 0.75 meters underwater 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (Population as of last census, 1990: 221,983) 
Independence succeeds as in OTL
Uniquely, tourism isn’t prevalent here: instead, intensive farming is set up for Bananas
The Economy still goes up though
Likewise, in 1988, the crash doesn’t completely wipe out the economy, instead causing a depression
The 1989 election results in a far-left politician winning, however the government doesn’t recognize the win as legitimate and it results in a civil war 
The civil war fizzles out by 1990 with the left-wing politician winning and establishing a planned economy 
Strict resource allocation and brutal repression keeps the country together through the Hot Summer
However, throughout the 90s, intensive agriculture combined with soil erosion due to strong winds cause increasingly devastating famines 
In 1997 the famines in addition to constant refugees leads to a civil war yet again with the government swinging to the far-right this time
In 1998 a genocide leads to almost 100,000 people dead
A Hurricane in 1999 ends up destroying the command center for the far-right junta and anarchy ensues
Throughout the 2000s, due to the rising sea level and extreme weather, people begin evacuating the country 
At first the warlords and remnants of the junta make it illegal and classify it as desertion, punishable by death, but Hurricane Wilson in 2004 makes them reconsider 
By 2010 the islands are evacuated 
By 2027 the islands are mostly underwater 
Trinidad (Population as of last census, 2000: 2,479,445)
Becomes a republic in 1976 like OTL
The black power movement is less violent in this timeline but more successful
In the late 70s the economy increases due to oil production
After the crash of 1988, a far-left group takes over the country and begins radical reforms
These reforms are initially viewed as popular by most of the lower class 
In the Hot Summer of 1990, spill over from the Venezuelan civil unrest causes Trinidad to close their borders
Due to their energy supplies, Trinidad is able to barely survive the Hot Summer but uses up a majority of their oil running farming equipment 
In 1991, Venezuela invades Trinidad. The dictator of Trinidad drafts up almost half the population and they put up a large fight but ultimately he surrenders in an attempt to keep his position. Instead he is executed
In 1992 Venezuela enters civil war and initially leaves Trinidad alone political infighting dominates Trinidad from 1992-1996
Tropical storms and flooding in the mid 90s cause much of the remaining population to be crammed into the north of the island
In 1997 a large flood causes famine that further ruins the political situation, collapsing into warlordism 
In 1998 Venezuelan guerillas begin using parts of Trinidad as bases in exchange for food
In 2001, Brazilian forces burn Trinidad to the ground in a scorched earth campaign 
From 2001-2004 Trinidad is in anarchy 
By 2010 Trinidad is abandoned due to rising sea levels and storms
By 2027 90% of Trinidad is under water

Egypt Coalition
United Arab Emirates (Still formed as in OTL. Growth is far faster than OTL, and economic aid from Britain helps overcome infrastructure bottlenecks. The Sheikhs do a lot of vanity projects, mostly fancy palaces and importing foreign works of art to fill their private mansions, but some of this does trickle down to the average person. A few even order studies on the effects of Oil Extraction on Nature (seeing how the healthy refineries and oil rigs made their private gardens far less fancy), but subsequently cover up and suppress the findings to save the economy. An entire new Capital City is erected between 1972 and 1985, called Dignity after a Referendum (Karma got 40% of the vote, but lost due to the Buddhist connotations of the word turning away some of the more conservative minded members of the populace), becoming a place of legendary opulence, with many post Great Death myths seen as originating from Glorious Decades Era Dignity. After the Arab Israeli War the country falls into chaos, with much of Dignity consumed by firestorms and subsequently reclaimed by the desert, but some expeditions by richer warlords (and a handful of foreign cultural initiatives) still head there as recently as 2023 to try and recover lost artifacts (with mixed success). Not shown on maps by 2000, uninhabited by 2004.
Bahrain (the 1965 March Intifada succeeds, but the country subsequently falls into chaos between the communist National Liberal Front, the Arab Nationalist Movement and the loosely leftist National Union Committee. The Soviets back the NLF, Egypt backs the Arab Nationalists while the NUC is given money by a very loose ,,I don’t want you to win, I want the others to lose” coalition including but not limited to their former enemies in Britain, the USA, and Iran. In 1967 the Popular Front, a Maoist Militia, broke off with the NLF and started their own side. Eventually, though, after years of constant war, the Union Committee won around 1969 and established a somewhat decentralized state, one that would hold elections in 1970. Said elections were won by the NUC-Aligned People’s Party, which would subsequently be re-elected in ‘75, ‘80 and ‘85. After Iran agreed to recognize the state’s independence in exchange for a stake in its Oil Industry, it soon began growing, trading with both sides of the Cold War (although charging the Soviets and Chinese higher prices for, you know, backing the losing side). With no Islamic Revolution in Iran to speak of, it remained quite prosperous, although the age old issues of corruption and wealth inequality (not as extreme as many other arab states, but Union Bosses often proved little better than their aristocratic predecessors - or were straight up one and the same in a few occasions) remained. In 1988, Brahin remained on the sidelines of the Arab Israeli War, although it was soon flooded with refugees. The Chairman of the National Union Assembly (the highest authority in the land) tried to take authoritarian powers to stop the crisis, but all this achieved was to cause a bunch of Unions to walk out and de facto begin a Second Civil War. This one did not see a conclusion, as by 1992, the country had collapsed into chaos, its remaining oil supplies too deep to be worth going after, especially given the risk of radiation poisoning. By 2000, not shown on most maps. A few Hindu Nationalists tried to eke out an existence here in the late 2010s, even taking over an offshore oil rig, but that too came to an end when the rickety, long rusting structure was swept away by a storm. 
Jordan (Jordan remains the PLO’s Main Backer throughout the 70s and 80s, experiencing rapid growth thanks to Jordanians working abroad sending their hard currency back to the country, allowing the Government to invest in infrastructure and improve the living standards of vast swathes of the populace. After a series of peaceful protests in 1983, the oppressive decrees of the late 60s were lifted and elections held - in 1984 and early 1988, respectively. The King would be beloved by much of the populace. The Mining Sector was especially profitable, although in spite of all of this the Military remained rather underfunded. This showed during the Arab Israeli War, as the Jordanian Army saw nothing but defeats until the Nuclear Conclusion arrived. Amman had a warhead lobbed straight at it, causing the collapse of Government, and following the subsequent near apocalyptic conditions most of the survivors ditched the land and fled elsewhere - some followed the PLO to their new promised land in Egypt, a handful went North to work alongside Islamic Warlords, and some even headed South in a vain hope to reach Somalia. The few who remained died out by the late 90s. Not shown on maps by the mid 2000s. 
Lebanon (With direct aid from the USA, Lebanon gets their Civil War somewhat under control, kicking out the PLO in the mid 70s and returning to their old position as a deregulated Financial Hub. One of the better places to be in the Middle East, and by the early 80s the Government rescinds most of their Emergency Powers and restores full Democracy, even if it’s a bit chaotic and plagued by ethnic conflict. When the War begins, Lebanon remains neutral, but that doesn't stop them from getting a healthy little dose of Radiation once everyone else nukes one another. The Government tries to keep a lid on things but the looting, mass panic buying and rioting stretch public services to their limit, with most local Governments (and the Central One) having collapsed by the Nuclear Winter of 1988-1989. The few that remain are plagued by the usual ills of post apocalyptic statecraft, namely abysmal cancer rates and horrific poverty. That said, it’s still not too bad, not until a band of Crusaders go down here in the mid 2000s and fuck everything up before dying of radiation poisoning. Lebanon’s remains never recover from that, and by 2015 it’s pretty much devoid of human life aside from a handful of real tough sonsovbitches hiding in basements or cellars and a handful of Crusader Outposts looking out for God knows what. 
Saudi Arabia (Invested a lot in other Arabic States to boost their economies. Their own economy was booming during the Glorious Decades, even more so than OTL, allowing for the Government to develop a generous welfare net while remaining a dictatorial and theocratic regime. Infrastructure is quickly developed. Riyadh faces civil unrest over the Government’s decision to mostly stay out of the Arab Israeli War, eventually forcing the King to declare War but only weeks after it actually begins. He gets a nuke lobbed at his capital for his trouble. After this, as expected, Saudi Arabia mostly collapses, although Mecca and Medina become independent ,,Islamic Republics” kept afloat by the still thriving pilgrimages, while in the mid 90s a group of Generals in the South get together and try to carve out a new homeland for Saudis in Yemen, and initially successfully manage to crush the feuding local authorities but fall to native revolt after it’s revealed they were stealing food to feed their own. Not shown on maps by 2000, although both Republics are doing somewhat fine (even if struggling with maintaining their utilities and their ageing population of clerics) given the circumstances. 
Syria (Assad decides not to antagonize Israel, since he has no backing from the Soviets or Egypt, and as such focuses on internal improvements. Under US Advisory, Syria begins to reform into a faulty Democracy - there are Elections, sure, but the Ba’ath Party still holds a majority of seats and is never ejected from power, with the opposition failing to ever consolidate and mostly consisting of a constantly shifting circus of small, seasonal parties formed along tribal lines. With Israel’s position stronger than ever, Syria doesn't intervene in Lebanon, instead focusing on economics - with oil prices booming, and china ever hungry for more produce to feed its labour pool, Syria soon becomes by far the most prosperous state in the Middle East, actually giving its citizenry a taste of their economic gains. Rural Areas are uplifted thanks to large scale infrastructure projects, with Assad consistently re-elected - many claim the elections are only for show, and while that is true, he does remain consistently popular with the people. He does keep the Military on his good side, though, and while the Syrian Army is not as strong as Egypt’s, it is still miles ahead of Jordan. When the Standoff begins, Syria surprisingly stands with other Arab States, which results in the USA pulling the plug on many of their investments. That doesn't last long enough to really bite into the prosperity, though, as the War goes Nuclear and the Syrian Government collapses. Multiple Nuclear Warheads are detonated in its territory, with Damascus turned into an irradiated wasteland and several other major cities merely pits of death and misery. In the following decades, the country becomes split among two rough lines, with the West ruled by ,,Neo Crusader” City States (huddling around the coastline) and the interior led by various Islamic Warlords, who could have rather easily driven the crusaders back into the sea if not for their constant infighting. That said, by 2020, the desert is so hellishly hot most of the Islamic States cease to exist, with only a handful of the most extreme ones holding on by pure fanaticism alone. The Coastal Warlords, meanwhile, grow closer together and form something of a mini EU for the sake of surviving together, actually rebuilding the city of Tartus after much of it is destroyed by a devastating storm (and the subsequent fires) in 2022. Not shown on maps by 1995, let alone 2000. 
Libya (Much like OTL, Libya’s Oil Profits give it one of the highest degrees of prosperity in all of Africa, while also keeping it relatively debt free. That said, Gaddafi’s many eccentric projects are also given extra funding thanks to this, and no opposition is tolerated. The Great Manmade River (a series of pipes made to give Libyans further inland access to drinking water) is further expanded. Minimum Wage Triples, rent reductions for the poorest citizens reach upwards of 60%, and thanks to even more Soviet Aid the cities of the coastline, most notably Tripoli, become hubs of opulence that made eyes water even among some Western Countries. Of course things go to shut during the Arab Israeli War, as after a short boom in prices the demand for oil plummets, and Gaddafi is pretty much forced to undo many of his reforms or risk total economic collapse. Hordes of refugees fleeing the Sahel also begin to cause trouble in the borderlands, and even the adoption of mobile,Territory Defense Units” that pretty much kill anything that even approaches the border doesn't help. By the late 90s, quality of life plummets as essential goods and services are rationed toward people who work in essential jobs and surveillance . In 2002, while he’s out in Moscow trying to convince them to send him some more cash, a popular uprising erupts that, you guessed it, soon escalates into a messy revolution and subsequently - civil war. It eventually turns into a brutal stalemate, with the rebels holding Tripoli and the Loyalists holed up in Benghazi. By 2006 it’s more like two city states that occasionally fight primitive naval battles and clash for whatever scrap remains in the no man’s land between them. By 2010 Tripoli fell to a rowing band led by a formerly Mauritanian Warlord, who sacks it and subsequently tries to use the stolen ships to sail to Italy before being blown to bits by the Federation Navy.  Benghazi holds on a bit better, but a storm in 2011 causes a collapse in law and order, with most subsequently leaving the ruins and leaving them to rot. By 2020, not shown on most maps. 
Kuwait (The Oil Fueled ,,Golden Era” never ends - with Saddam Hussein too busy being a Stooge of Moscow, he is not allowed to do anything that could endanger the Kremlin’s foreign relations. Kuwait develops an even more liberal culture than in OTL, with actual anti corruption programs and the Royals even giving up some of their powers in the early 80s for the sake of better PR in the West. Kuwait City is even considered for the host of TTL’s Arab League HQ, although that idea is eventually abandoned. For the first time ever, Kuwaiti - Iraqi relations become half decent, with Saddam agreeing to stop constantly molesting the borderlands in exchange for the small state agreeing to legalize its fringe Communist Party (the first meeting had a whopping 17 members attend, two of whom left by the end, accusing the newly elected Chairman of ‘Revisionism’). The Government throws a lot of money at cultural programs like Theatres ‘n shit. When the Nuclear War comes, there is actually a bit of a tug of war inside the Parliament on if they should back their traditional Iranian Allies or maybe show Solidarity with the Arab World and declare war on the Israelis. Both options are shit in their own right, so the Emir decides to sit things out. As the Nuclear Apocalypse begins, the country is immediately hit with the environmental aftermath and de facto collapses due to waves of Iraqis fleeing to perceived safety within its walls. It fell from one warlord to another for a few years before mostly settling down as an overcrowded refugee port by 2000, although its population dwindled from that point onward as disease and horrible living conditions took their toll. In 2027, Kuwait City still (suprisingly) stands, but for the most part it's just the surviving refugees forming a proto state of several colonies inside the Al Salam Palace and Grand Mosque (the Kuwait Towers also held a group of survivors until they collapsed in 2019), surrounded by slowly rotting architecture and slightly fresher dusty, lifeless slums, signs of two ages long gone - an age of optimism, and an age of thinking tomorrow was worth living to see. The rest of the country is abandoned. 
Qatar (the 1972 Palace Coup fails, and so Qatar becomes the Black Sheep of the Middle East - sure, it grows very prosperous, with its GDP breaking records by growing 1,800% from 1971 to 1988, but very little of that actually trickles down to the average person, with the vast majority of this cash wasted on vanity projects by the Nobility - one of which literally consists of burning money as a status symbol. They don’t bother to buy tons of foreign works of art like the Liechtenstein Government, or to make their own like the Kuwaitis, instead they hire “controversial” artists to create the most kitschy works imaginable. Honorable mentions include the world’s largest chair, a Banana Plantation in the middle of the desert tended to exclusively by former Government Officials, and a small (only about 25% of the size of the original) replica of Mount Rushmore, except with the faces of the largest donors instead of US Presidents (the donations covered over 150% of the project’s total cost, leaving a hefty profit for the designer, even when one of the quartet demanded that their teeth be made with Ivory instead of stone). Qatar didn’t give much of a shit about World Politics, and to not piss off their American trade Partners they stayed out of the Arab Israeli War, which provoked mass civil unrest. Right as the Nukes fell the country itself collapsed into Civil War, mostly fought with sharp tools and melee weapons due to a lack of firearms (the Government defunded the Military and Police to fuel their debauchery), and in the ensuing chaos it was rapidly overwhelmed by waves of refugees. By 2000, very few remained, not having succumbed to starvation and radiation, with even the hardened survivors dying out by 2010, their bleached bones slowly drying in the shadows of Osymandian Statues, perfect time capsules of the Glorious Decades. Unlike Kuwait, nobody bothered to risk men to save those “works of art”, and so many of them still stood in half decent condition by 2027 (aside from the World’s Largest Chair, some of which was chopped up into firewood in the 90s and the rest burning down due to a lack of maintenance somewhere around 2004-2006). Not shown on maps by 2000.
Oman (Things go even better than OTL, with the Consultative Assembly slightly more powerful and social services further boosted by the discovery and subsequent exploitation of Oil. Things are calm after the rebels are crushed in the mid 70s. Oman stands alongside the other Arab States against Israel, and while no nukes are lobbed at it, spillover from Yemen’s Civil War, mass pollution, oil fires blackening the skies and the death of much of the Government cause it to spiral into chaos and not recover. Not shown on most maps by 1995, not on any by 2005.
Yemen, North (Remains poorer than south due to Saudi hostility and less connections)
Yemen, South  (No 1979 War means no Civil War, opens up due to big COMECON Connections. Both states begin to fight after Soviet Assistance dries up in the early 90s, the Civil War escalates after both are cooped by ambitious Generals, eventually the Saudi Remnant Intervenes, tries to set things up as a sort of Redoubt, fail due to native revolt. By 2000 mostly abandoned outside a few enclaves, even they wither away by 2010. On Maps, if shown, still shown as North and South Yemen.)
Iraq (Population: 57,239,804, circa 1980)
In the aftermath of the Tehran Accords, Iraq turned to an unlikely ally: the USSR
PLO members from Jordan and Lebanon move here in big numbers, eventually become qatifists 
After the failed Iranian Revolution, Iraq signs several treaties with the USSR and even starts to develop their own nuclear energy program, though in secret 
Iraq offers to allow the Islamic Socialists from Iran to live in Iraq
In the 1980s, Iraq starts building up their military, with many believing that they are planning to invade Iran 
However, in 1988, when Iraq joins the Egyptian Coalition, they unveil the true reason for their build up: the invasion of Israel 
Bagdad is one of the places nuked, with many other locations in Iraq nuked 
Between 1988-1990, Iraq falls to chaotic civil war
Qatifists try to gain access to their nuclear arsenal
By 1991 though, there are no victors, and massive oil fires have burnt down much of the country 
By 2000, it is completely abandoned 
Great Iraqi Oil fire
By 2027, it is so hot that Iraq is incapable of supporting any life - in some areas, like in India and Pakistan, where the nukes actually created tiny wildlife sanctuaries, Iraq is completely and utterly uninhabitable 
Egypt (Nasser’s successor is not Sadat but someone more openly Pro Soviet. This means the Israelis never give up the Sinai. The Soviets, worried about potentially tying China further the the USA (Still deluding themselves into thinking that Chenism was just a phase that they’d grow out of) convince the Arabs to not launch the Yom Kippur War, else their foes be united in support of Israel. The Egyptians begrudgingly agree, instead focusing on cobbling together an alliance for a future War - which would later grow to be the Arab Coalition of ‘88. For now though, they do this under the guise of closer economic integration, in the vein of other major such unions like COMECON. Instead he focuses on internal reforms, like giving land to poor families, which helps agriculture get back on its feet. The Profits of the Glorious Decades allow for Cairo to invest a lot into their Military, which slowly grew stronger during the 80s. By 1988 they feel confident enough to challenge Israel, and we all know how that ends up. After the Nuclear War, the Government collapses into infighting, with various Military Warlords and Islamic Statelets emerging. Eventually the PLO, which underwent its own "Long March” from the irradiated hellhole of Palestine, manages to take over the remaining fertile lands in the Nile Delta and pretty much forms the nexus of a new civilization. By 2000, though, they were struggling as the Nile became far less predictable, with its levels nearly drying up or causing horrible floods seemingly at random due to climate change. The other states, due to the radiation, sandstorms and desertification, mostly die out by that point too. That said, using a network of basements and the never completed Cairo Metro (a sort of vanity project by the country’s final President, chosen after the death of Nasser’s Successor in 1986) they form a literal ,,underground state” in a sort of ironic echo of what the Israelis were doing. By 2020 not shown on any maps. 
Neutral Arab States 
Algeria (The 1965 Coup doesn't happen as the Military decides to bide their time, instead manipulating the Administration behind the scenes like a bunch of Creons instead of moving against the Popular President. While, as can be expected, the state remained corrupt and often influenced by special interest groups, it did develop a somewhat healthy Democratic System, with two parties peacefully exchanging power on several occasions and multiple cabinets actually surviving their term without the need for snap elections. The Oil Boom means the country becomes very prosperous, and while a large cut of the profits goes toward the Military and Elites, much is still left to the average citizen, raising living standards. The country’s third president, elected in 1982 and then re-elected five years later, establishes a robust welfare system and actually reconciles many of the feuding religious groups in a widely publicized conference. Of course, he faces accusations of infidelity, but they’re disproven rather quickly. As can be expected, the Economy collapses alongside the prices of Oil in late 1988, and the President is impeached by the People’s National Assembly for incompetence, but the various parties and factions subsequently bicker for very long about who to elect in his place, with a variety of candidates - including the President of the Assembly, a popular footballer, and a General in the Armed Forces - discussed and falling through. Said General, very salty, stages a coup and subsequently turns the country into a Militarized Dictatorship, trying his best to keep the Southern Border intact and turn the country toward self reliance. However, a horrifying drought in 1996 forces hundreds of thousands to flee north, causing ethnic tension as locals usually don’t want to share with the newcomers, escalating into outright violence and riots. By 1998 the situation was out of control, with a four sided civil war (all of the sides are Dictatorships, but two are led by Civilians and two by Military Men, all of whom are from different groups) that mostly fizzled out by 2000 (not helped by the refugees forming their own statelets). Algiers proclaimed independence from one of the sides ( the ,,People’s Government of Algeria”, a somewhat Socialistic affair led by a former Minister of the Interior) and became an independent city state, one that was nevertheless flooded in 2009 and not rebuilt. Not shown on most maps by 2000, and not on any by 2010. 
Tunisia (The Democratic Constitutional Rally, a loose alliance of Socialists and Arab Nationalists, still established a repressive dictatorship, but the modernization process was far quicker than in OTL thanks to Tunis openly aligning itself with the Soviets to mooch off foreign aid. The rise in prosperity was not as sharp as in other states, due to Tunisia already being quite well off (especially for African Standards), but it was noticeable nonetheless. They still aided the PLO but refused to participate in the Arab Israeli War. In the subsequent chaos, combined with a rapid end to all Soviet Funding, the country began to teeter on the brink, with the CRD becoming increasingly authoritarian as time went on.  The President was cooped by his prime Minister, who subsequently tried to realign with the West and do a mass Privatization Program, but the Graves Administration was not interested, and Europe remained sceptical of such a formerly Socialist man suddenly having a ,,change of heart”. As such, his liberalization gave him no benefits at all, and the people started to get angry. To try and salvage the situation the President pretty much admitted defeat and evacuated everyone he considered worthy to a newly erected “Tripolis Fortress City”. The rest of the country fell into two separate camps - the Northern ,,Tunesian Liberation Front”, which called for a return to Glorious Decades era Centrally Planned Economics, and the ,,Democratic Union” which wished to instead try and beg the West for Assistance. Both fell by 2000, although Tunis managed to hold on. The President was assassinated in 2002, and since that point the office had around a dozen holders by 2010, none of whom held it for longer than half a year. As Libya collapses too, so does Tripoli, finally overwhelmed by the hostile weather and bands of remaining refugees. Not shown on most maps by 2020. 
Morocco (Prince Moulay becomes King instead of Hassan, ushering in an age of Liberalization and moderate Democratic Reform. A Bicameral Parliament is born and subsequently forms several successful governments, all while Morocco profits from the phosphate boom and invests in becoming what amounts to a tax haven, using the profits to develop a healthy tourism industry. After Moulay dies of cancer in 1981 (earlier because of the shit in the air), he’s replaced by his son (also Moulay), the ,,Red Prince”, who ushers in more progressive (mostly feminist) reforms and strengthens his father’s welfare net. The mid 1980s see increasing investments in education and the passage of a new constitution, one that reduces the monarch to a purely ceremonial figure. For a while, after the crisis, things go on as normal, until the decline in trade makes their economy highly unstable. The Government cuts back on welfare, much to the public’s chagrin, but has enough public credit to keep things going for the time being. The illusion of normalcy (with Elections and decent living standards) continues until 1996, when a drought fucks up much of the interior and forces the Prime Minister to decleare Martial Law. Living conditions continue to decline, and when the Algerian Civil War spills over in 1999, a Revolution (somewhat backed by Moscow, as they want the phosphate) happens and a Republic is proclaimed, one that immediately collapses into infighting between a ,,locally grown” so to speak Socialist Wing and Pro Moscow Communists. This escalates into a Civil War that degenerates into anarchy by 2003. Not shown on maps by 2010, although it remains a popular destination for various scrap hunters, who even set up temporary (building anything permanent with the storms is a fool’s errand) towns on its coastline, under the shadow of long dormant high rises and towns buried by the sands of time. After the anarchy, the federation comes in and sets up a puppet state
Mauritania (The Mauritian People’s Party remains as Authoritarian as OTL, but the development process is even faster than OTL. Iron Mines are exploited to their fullest extent, and a reckless program of fishing means that there are signs of those pleasant animals going the way of the dodo as early as 1985. However, most ignore this, and the nomadic populace is herded into those newly built Industrial Sites as little more than slaves to fuel the President’s Economic Agenda. Droughts caused by even harsher climate change mean that more and more are forced to move to the cities for work, and even by 1988 certain areas of the country are de facto unpopulated aside from Law Enforcement and Military Units sent to keep any potential dissidents in line and stop enemy incursions. Without any stupid incursion into the Sahara, the country remains decently prosperous, even if plagued by endemic corruption and on shaky ground, with wages and whatever welfare exists adjusted to the international prices of iron. As the Crash Happens, the President tries to calm people down but is killed by a hand grenade on Live Television, being succeeded by a cabal of Slaveowners. Some are Industrialists and some are Agricultural Barons, but they’re united in their support of the practice. The Ban on Slavery is reversed and before long the country goes full on Autarkic, and after they work the ,,lesser” castes to death they begin raiding neighboring countries for their citizens. This proves a terrible mistake, as someone (it was never proven who) bombs the Capital in 2002, causing a collapse of the ,,Government” with the exception of a couple coastal port towns. The interior is completely consumed by the Sahara. By 2010 not shown on maps.
Somalia (Under Barre’s rule, thanks to a tug of War between the USSR and China, it receives a lot of aid. He mostly focuses on internal improvements, like fixing the literacy rate, curbing corruption and fighting rural poverty. Annexes Djibouti in 1974. Thanks to his newfound links to the Arab World, the Ogaden War never happens because international mediation sees Somalis in Ethiopia be given Autonomy and both states sign various treaties to facilitate trade. Neither side is happy but they also don’t want to lose out on lucrative international loans and benefits. As the 80s begin, Barre definitely turns away from the USSR and endorses limited scale Private Growth, causing them to pull out but further enriching the country as China pretty much uses Somalia as a testing ground for their later haphazard adventures in Africa during the 2000s. As the Glorious Decades come to a close, with their economy pretty much fully based around food, they remain semi comfortable until around 1990, when water acidification kills off their fisheries, foreign business pulls out,and several sandstorms fuck up whatever agriculture remains. Barre tries to salvage the situation by invading Ethiopia, and as expected his peasant levy gets their asses handed to ‘em by the semi professional Ethiopian Army. In the aftermath of this, the country collapses into anarchy, with pirates hunting whatever little commerce remains in nearby waters and the rest trying to barter off Barre’s achievements as scrap in exchange for food. There aren’t too many takers, though, and a flow of Yemeni (or further northward, fleeing through Yemen) refugees doesn't help. Around 2000 mogadischu is taken over by a semi competent theocrat who begins a campaign to reunite the country, and actually manages to carve out a sizable fief in the center of it, but is killed when the Ethiopians bomb him as a ,,border security operation” and his lieutenants collapse into infighting shortly afterward. By 2010, as piracy dries up and the environment becomes borderline hellish, Somalia becomes heavily depopulated, with many people even trekking into the interior to become ,,associates” (slaves) of the Water Lords. Many don’t make it. Not shown on most maps by 2020, although some Communist States (mostly ones formerly aligned with China, or China itself) insist their comrades in Somalia are still just fine.
Djibouti (Uprising in the early 70s after another rigged Independence referendum, succeeds in expelling the French with Soviet aid, merges with Somalia. As the country begins to collapse in the 90s, Djibouti proclaims Independence, only to immediately be invaded by Ethiopia. Addis Ababa sucks everything of worth out of the province - not that there’s much, with their main source of income, the Port, useless due to a lack of trade. They too leave around the year 2000 and leave the area in anarchy, with most inhabitants fleeing or dying of radiation poisoning brought from the North with winds. Depending on your nation’s political affiliation, shown as part of either Ethiopia or Somalia by 2010. )
Israel 
Israel (Population: 8,683,789, circa 1980)
Israel keeps Sinai, and Egypt’s new Pro-soviet government makes Israel cautiously peaceful 
Israel signs the Shanghai Accords in 1978
Without the Yom Kippur war, Israel is able to focus more on their internal matters
Israel is suspicious of it though, and starts researching bunker ecology, desalination, nuclear power and many other things on how live underground, fearing an invasion or nuclear war between China and the USSR
Instead of settling the West Bank and Gaza, Israel settles the shores of Sinai, letting the PLO simmer
Israel turns much of the Sinai into lavish resorts in the 1980s 
The influx of Jews from around the world (such as the USSR) create further rifts within the Israeli government, which almost falls to civil war in 1983 after a constitutional crisis 
Throughout the Glorious Decades, Israel mainly keeps to themselves, instead focusing on using financial leverage against their enemies (namely Iraq and other Arab countries) 
The only thing keeping Israel as a country is support from the USA, as Israel becomes the most militarized country on the planet 
Israel also develops their nuclear weapons all the way back in 1973, though after TMI, they scale it back and allegedly dispose of them
In april 1988, the new leader of Egypt starts aggressively claiming that Sinai should be returned to Egypt. The PLO also starts ramping up their operations 
On May 15, 1988, Egypt and their coalition invade Israel, leading to the Sinai War
On June 8th, 1988, Israel launches their nukes, causing the collapse of civilization 
In summer of 1988, Israel falls to civil war and a radical fundamentalist authorizes the expulsion of all Arabs from Israel and parts of Lebanon, Jordan, Syria, Saudi Arabia and Egypt, after December 31st, 1988, all Arabs will be killed on sight
In 1989, Israel activates their “Ark Protocol”, and retreats to many underground bunkers beneath their tourist destinations. It turns out that these bunkers, made to be relatively self-sufficient, are all connected and span the length of Israel and into parts of the Sinai
Between 1989-1990, as people are evacuated into the bunkers, various fundamentalists try to attack Israel, with the IDF shooting on sight 
By 1991, Israel has severed diplomatic relations with the rest of the world, and begins setting up tons of traps/mines on the surface to dissuade refugees from entering the Kibbutz complex 
On January 1st, 1992, the last IDF soldier retreats underground and for the most part, Israel’s status is left as a mystery 
In the late 1990s, Israeli “exiles” begin showing up in Jerusalem, which has been settled by Arab refugees. Turns out that in the bunkers, it was a waste of resources to feed or even execute prisoners, so they send them to the surface. These groups eventually form gangs for survival, and start to pillage the ruins on the surface. They also claim that every male had to deposit some of their sperm to be frozen, and then was forcibly sterilized 
In 2001, the largest of these gangs, the largest of which is the “Followers of Cain”, kicks out the last arabs from Jerusalem, which then causes it to turn into a warzone 
In the 2000s, the Israeli exiles and the Arabs duke it out, with neo-crusaders from Europe joining in as well 
By 2011, much of Israel’s automated defenses have been exhausted, with their SAMs depleted and many of their mines detonated. Some entrances to the Kibbutz system have been attacked by outsiders, and the IDF enacts a policy of preemptively severing contact with the bunkers to prevent them from “contaminating” the survivors of Israel. A few of these cut-off bunkers become havens for Israeli Exiles, Arab terror groups, and one in Qiryat Shemona even becomes the headquarters for the Order of Paul
In 2014, radiation begins leaking out into the Mediterranean
In 2015 and 2016, several Israeli exile groups band together to try to dig their way back into the bunker complex, and in 2017 they finally break into a bunker under Arad. This leads to a series of battles between the IDF and the invaders 
In 2018, several Israeli bunkers authorize the “koch drach oyvim” program, basically recycling arab flesh for food
Between 2017-2024, various areas of Israel stop sending automated messages. The bunker complexes used coded messages to communicate, and gradually, bunkers go dark. In 1992, it was projected that 236 bunkers existed in the Kibbutz system, but by 2025, only thirteen bunkers still produce signals 
After the solar flare, all 12 remaining bunkers stopped transmitting 
As of 2027, the status of Israel is unknown 


Australia (Population: 36,845,591, Circa 2020) 
Politics: 
1969-1972: John Gorton, LNP
1972-1983: Gough Whitlam, ALP 
1983-1990: Bob Hawke, ALP
1990-1997: Bob Hawke, AALLP
1998-2016: Callum Fraser Dorrington, AALLP
2016-2025: Malcolm Clark Rhyder, GSP 
2025-2029: Damien Harkness Reid, GSP
LNP: OTL Liberal-National Party, Centre-Right
ALP: OTL Australian Labor Party, Centre-Left
AALLP: Australian Alliance of Liberals and Labor Party, a coalition formed after the Crash of 1988, Left-Wing with a touch of social conservatism and heavily focused on environmentalism. Anti-immigration, extremely protectionist, anti-military, oversees the union with New Zealand
GSP: Green Socialist Party, an originally fringe party formed in 1991 by people who believed that the AALLP wasn’t doing enough. Centre-right, eco-fascist, syndicalist government that is very nationalistic and pro-military, wants to formally take over Antarctica and New Zealand. After the Chinese attack on the navy, nationalism skyrocketed and under Reid, Australia began to prepare to take Antarctica “by force” from those “Godless commies” in Patagonia
In 1972, Australia does not sign the Shanghai accords
In 1972, a whole slew of welfare policies are enacted, like increased welfare payments, legalizing divorce, healthcare was nationalized, education was made completely free. Australia unofficially recognizes the Maoist enclave in Moscow as the true government of China, and not Chen. Australian troops are withdrawn from Vietnam, and relations with the US become strained over refusal to sign the Shanghai Accords and also ending their involvement in Vietnam. Grants for the arts are also made. The work week is limited to 36 hours, and 18 months maternity leave is given to both parents (though they cannot take it at the same time). A pension is made to support single parents, and civil rights laws are passed on the same level as the US (in this time line, the civil rights movement is far less polarizing and discrimination purely based on race is pretty much nonexistent) - Pretty much it’s a welfare utopia
Australia does not establish diplomatic ties with China or Taiwan
In 1973, relations with the aboriginals become very close, with a specialized welfare system and a sort of “affirmative action” program 
Despite not signing the Shanghai Accords, Australia’s economy still grows, just not nearly as fast as other countries 
In 1975, the negotiation for getting loans to extract minerals is more successful. India, South Korea and Argentina would help fund the extraction 
March 23, 1975 - Australia legalizes birth control after doing research into thalidomide and the pill 
In 1976, Australia helps resettle indochinese refugees, mainly to their outlying islands. Australia also sees a lot of emigration of Australian citizens out to other countries like Japan, Western Europe, and North America. 
In 1977, the ANZUS treaty collapses due to Australia and New Zealand’s refusal to help fight in Vietnam War and their stance against nuclear weapons
Summer 1980 - Evidence of coral bleaching is found off the coast of Australia, prompting research into climate change and the effects of industrialization on the environment 
In the 1980s, Australia actually BANS research extraction on areas that could damage the environment, mainly Tasmania
In the 1983 election, Bob Hawke wins as in OTL but he is much more popular
Hawke’s foreign minister though is a bit more involved with the non-aligned movement, and Australia officially joins it, eventually becoming the leader of it in 1988
Under Bob Hawke, trade unions are protected and Australia is one of the few countries to actually have worker’s rights enforced 
In 1984, Australia actually makes birth control non-taxable. Hawke also gradually lifts tariffs and opens Australia up to outside trade, though they still do not sign the Shanghai Accords or join a trading bloc
Hawke doesn’t reduce the government this much ITTL, nor are parts of it privatized 
February 26, 1986 - Australia outlaws Chlorofluorocarbons 
In 1987, Australia officially federalizes and removes all legal influence from the UK
In 1988, representation of Aboriginals is increased on the federal level
After the crash of 1988, PM Hawke is advised to ban immigration, to which he agrees. He also authorizes a program to pay for the safe passage of Australian expats around the world, with a deadline of returning by December 31st, 1988. The Christmas, Cocos-Keeling, and Norfolk Islands are also to be evacuated by this date 
In 1989, Australia makes several deals with neighboring islands and countries (like New Zealand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Japan is considered but not contacted) and sets up many trade deals 
Later in 1989, Hawke sets up a rationing system for oil to phase it out and to build more nuclear power plants (at this point, Australia’s sole nuclear power plant is located in the middle of the outback three KM from Kalgoorie). Oil is completely phased out by 2000
In 1990, the LNP disbands with many of the moderate liberals jumping ship to join the labors and they create the AALLP party, with Hawke as its leader. He gets reelected in the aftermath of the Hot Summer of 1990, after which Australia creates the Department of National Stability - a governmental organization that focuses on mitigating brushfires, famines, drought, and also researching alternative energy sources
Throughout the 1990s, 10 nuclear power plants are built, with 35 more being planned. In the meantime, solar and wind power is slowly developing. Rationing is enforced in 1997, a one-child policy is enforced in 1996, and in 1995, the justice system is overhauled by having criminals work as laborers in the outback. This is very successful at deterring law-breakers. Advances in arcology are made, with massive apartment blocks being built to house rural migrants as they move towards the cities as the government engages in massive rebuilding projects. These projects provide jobs and help the economy, while also implementing nature better into cities. 
In 1995, Australia joins the Alliance of Nations, but never hosts a meeting. 
How does Australia develop all this stuff? Well, they actually use the various islands in the pacific as test beds for the technology. Some islands are the site of humanitarian disasters after prototype nuclear batteries catch fire and burn down entire towns. Australia’s security service sweeps these under the rug, but Hawke’s opposition, Dorrington (a liberal moderate who jumped ship in 1990) exposes it and uses it to force Hawke to resign. 
Under Dorrington’s government, further advances in arcology are made, with community gardens being heavily encouraged in every community. Dorrington also initially rescinds the ration policy
In 2003, the Red Summer causes Australian emergency services to be overwhelmed as cases of heat stroke and dehydration skyrocket, while also leading to a famine. Dorrington is forced to reimplement rationing. He gives the executive order for mandatory evacuation into one of 15 “mega cities” along the coast, with the deadline for everyone to move out by 2015. He begins working with several prominent members of the aboriginal community to create “reservation cities” for them, if they want, though many choose to remain in the coastal mega cities
In 2004, Australia begins researching more cost-effective ways to desalinate water. It starts out slow, but continues to be more and more necessary 
In 2005, a massive brushfire burns down Darwin and much of the northern coast line. Contact and trade with outlying nations like Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines gradually become less frequent  
In 2006, Australia begins retrofitting their navy to use nuclear power
In 2007, pirates and illegal refugees are becoming more frequent, leading Australia and New Zealand to form a military alliance and having their navies work closely to patrol their coasts
By 2008, all remaining companies in Australia are controlled by unions
Also in 2008, the Red Flu reaches Australia through a boat of people fleeing Indonesia, leading to a strict quarantine in Cairns
In 2009, a scandal involving miners falsifying where they dump their refuse leads to stricter laws about land management, though the union bosses and the government remain relatively hostile towards each other
In 2010, while most secondary and tertiary education is still free, only primary education is readily offered by the government. Citizens must take an exam, and if they show enough aptitude they are allowed to go to secondary school, and must take a similar exam to go into tertiary school. If they fail either exam, they instead go to a trade school and get a union-provided job 
Most popular professions in Australia from 2000-2016 is being a farmer, post 2016 it is being in the armed forces/militia/police
In 2011, due to the Purple Summer, certain livestock such as sheep, pig, and cattle are banned, with most animal protein coming from vertical chicken farms and later on, Emu farms
In 2012, advances in desalination technology have led to practically limitless clean water. Coupled with advances in solar technology, Australia is completely self-sufficient with energy 
In 2013, overtures from the UK, Ireland, Europe, Canada, and USA all try to pressure Australia into exchanging technology, but Australia remains extremely isolationist. 
In 2014, China tries to invade Australia. This is a huge turning point in Australia’s identity. Enlistment skyrockets, and Australia begins talks with unifying with New Zealand
In 2015, large seawalls are built in South Australia 
The Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016 cause Australia to ban working during the day, and switching to closed off greenhouses
In 2016, capitalizing on the invasion, Rhyder is elected on a platform of militarizing Australia to prevent further invasions. Australia gradually becomes more and more fascist, with labor unions and state governments declining in power with the federal government becoming more and more powerful. He also begins secretly developing a nuclear program
In 2017, Australia and New Zealand finalize their union, with New Zealand merging their armed forces with Australia but remaining autonomous in internal affairs 
In 2018, a massive tropical storm forces the evacuation of the remaining islands in Australia’s sphere of influence. Despite being technologically supported by Australia, and even having a work program where they could earn citizenship, Australia refuses to evacuate them. Instead, New Zealand offers to resettle them in the northern island. 
In 2019, the old penal system is abolished and now criminals are simply sent “to the outback” 
Also in 2019, ANZ begins researching and developing blimps and other dirigibles for air transport
In 2020, the ANZ navy begins shooting unidentified boats on sight 
In 2021, the New Zealand armed forces are retrofitted to use nuclear or solar power. Reconnance blimps, used by the state security forces and the army, are a common sight in ANZ
In 2022, the new zealand economy becomes entirely intertwined with Australia’s after the Rhyder government begins building sea walls in New Zealand
In the Second Great Heatwave of 2023 and 2024, NZ is plagued with drought, leading to Australia to exercise more control over their allocation of land, resources, and city infrastructure. Desalination plants are built, along with solar and wind farms, though NZ refuses to build any nuclear power plants on their shores
In 2025, Reid is elected PM, and he is even more nationalistic than Rhyder was
Even with all the advanced arcology and brutally efficient resource allocation, ANZ still faced a major famine in 2024 and as such, in 2025, Australia begins looking into using the rapidly melting Antarctica to expand their farms
In 2026, Australia begins researching more efficient ways of building vertical farms, along with what it would take to colonize Antarctica. They also start preparing for war with Argentina
After the solar storm of 2026, much of Australia’s infrastructure is permanently damaged. Several nuclear power plants go critical, blowing up 4 cities and leading to almost 10 million deaths. As radiation begins to spread across western Australia, the government realizes that they need to bug out and fast. A campaign to colonize Antarctica is drawn up, while emergency bunkers are built in the Tasmanian reserve. 
As of 2027, ANZ is fighting tooth and nail for control of Antarctica. Citizens are being evacuated from Australia to NZ, and plan to be resettled in Antarctica. 
Why are they invading? Australia’s meteorological society predicts that due to the increased climate change, it’s predicted with near 100% certainty that a devastating “hypercane” would form in the Pacific
New Zealand (Population: 6,478,121, circa 2020, New Zealanders, 1,543,925 refugees) 
Politics: 
1972-1975: Norman Kirk, Labor
1975-1978: Robert Muldoon, National
1978-1984: Bill Rowling, Labor
1984-1987: David Lange, Labor
1987-1990: Jim Bolger, National 
1990-1999: Jim Anderton, New Labor
1999-2011: Te Ariki Mātene Raukawa, Islanders Party
2011-2020: Elliot Tamati Fraser, New Labor
2020-2023: Moana Iosefa Ngata, Islanders Party 
2023-2026: Reuben Te One Kaipara, New Labor
2026-2034: Anahera Waimaru Tohu, Islanders Party
Labor Party: OTL NZ Labor Party
National Party: OTL NZ National Party
New Labor: Started at first as OTL NZ New Labor Party, who left Labor because they felt they weren’t left-wing enough. Focuses on the welfare state, government stability, and close ties with Australia. After 2011 it essentially becomes Australia’s puppet party to influence New Zealand. By the 2020s it is a center-right nationalist party, though they still protect the welfare state
Islanders Party: A Maori-dominated egalitarian party, with focuses on the environment, clean energy, anti-military, and protecting democracy. 
In 1972 the values party is formed, the equal pay act is passed, labor is elected, NZ withdraws from the vietnam war. New Zealand DOES sign the Shanghai Accords, however, they are so isolated that many countries (bar papua new guinea) consider them impractical to trade with
In 1973, New Zealand does not send a frigate to protest French nuclear testing
In 1974, Norman Kirk doesn’t die due to advances in medical technology in the 1960s
In 1975, Kirk loses to Muldoon, who tries to integrate New Zealand into the world economy, though he is more or less unsuccessful. The Waitangi Tribunal is established. 
In 1976, New Zealand day is not changed to Waitangi day. Instead, it is given to October 10th, the day the Waitangi Tribunal Act is passed. 
In 1977, New Zealand signs the Gleneagles Agreement, condemning Apartheid. In January, the occupation of Bastion Point results in further negotiations between the government and the Maori. New Zealand also distances itself legally from the UK, though not as much as Australia or South Africa
In 1978, unemployment reaches 1% due to the stagnation of economic conditions. Many begin to leave for places like Indonesia, the Phillipines, Japan and South Korea
In 1979, Air New Zealand Flight 901 successfully lands. Careless days are created to reduce fuel consumption. The Three Mile Island disaster solidifies New Zealand’s anti-nuclear policy
In 1980, the equivalent of the CER agreement is signed. Rent and price freezes go into effect until the next election. 
In 1981, Rowling wins reelection due to the economic stagnation. He implements more welfare policies and also tries to make New Zealand more attractive to tourists and investors 
In 1982, limits on livestock and crops are implemented to try to prevent a dust bowl/economic crash 
In 1983, the first major tourist resorts are opened, they see some success but overall New Zealand is not as popular of a destination due to how remote it is
In 1984, David Lange of the Labor Party is elected
In 1985, the Greenpeace vessel is not sunk and is able to safely leave NZ, though the French immediately seize it 
In 1986, New Zealand decriminalizes homosexuality but still does not allow civil unions to be formed. New Zealand officially distances itself legally from the UK, and becomes a federation much like Australia
In 1987, Maori is made an official language. Wind and solar energy begins to be researched, though it is in the very early prototype stages. The Edgecumbe Earthquake miraculously results in almost no damage, as only a single car is damaged, which is then paid for by the government. Jim Bolger wins election with a coalition government
In 1988, the right to unionize is protected under law. Cyclone Bola strikes the North Island, leading to a government program to build a sea wall. Unemployment is at 5% by the time the Crash of 1988 happens
After the crash of 1988, Bolger desperately tries to make New Zealand attractive for investors, offering tariff-free imports, tax benefits, and streamlined immigration. This does basically nothing, and only further fuels discontent. 
In 1989, the welfare state is slowly dismantled to cut government spending and to try to make New Zealand seem attractive to capitalists who like tiny governments. The only trade deal that is successful is one between Australia and New Zealand. Many in the labor party leave due to their dissatisfaction of how the labor party handled the economy in 1987-1990
In 1990, Jim Anderton of New Labor wins in a landslide. He begins to rebuild much of the welfare state, makes a closer alliance with Bob Hawke of the AALLP, and begins constructing sea walls as a way to reduce unemployment 
In 1991, Australia and New Zealand begin exchanging solar and wind technology. New Zealand also evacuates Tokelau 
In 1992, a huge storm devastates a wind farm off the coast of Great Barrier Island. 
In 1993, Australia tries to convince New Zealand to use nuclear energy but they are very very resistant. Constant overcast weather significantly slows the development of solar technology. Outside of a few prototype wind farms, much of New Zealand is still using fossil fuels 
In 1994, cars are banned, and fuel is prioritized for transportation 
In 1995, an economic recession causes the NZ government to nationalize several large companies to prevent the complete collapse of the economy. New Zealand joins the Alliance of Nations
In 1996, more offshore wind farms are made but they are costly and extremely dangerous to build. To compensate, coal mines are opened 
In 1997, a Maori politician of the fringe “Islanders Party” begins campaigning on regulating the environment in an almost draconic way. Te Ariki Mātene Raukawa also tries to shut down the coal mines. 
In 1998, strikes, protests, and occupations later force the government to negotiate with the growing “Islanders Party” group
In 1999, Te Ariki Mātene Raukawa wins in a narrow victory of the New Labor party, and begins expanding the welfare state and removing any legal discriminations against the Maori. He also draws ire with the Australians about their treatment of the Aborigines, but maintains cool relations. 
In the early 2000s, New Zealand begins an arcology project similar to Australia’s
In 2002, the first combination hydroelectric dam and desalination plant is made in Port Waikato. 
In 2003, New Zealand begins a deal with Australia to export their clean water to help the droughts in Australia. A pirate off the coast of Wellington takes an Australian merchant hostage, and the Australian navy starts a policy of “shoot first, ask questions later”. New Zealand reluctantly agrees, and signs a pact of mutual defense with Australia. 
In 2004, a bill to increase military spending barely passes. PM Raukawa is against it, but signs it to prevent a constitutional crisis. 
In 2005, New Zealand sends humanitarian aid over to Australia after the Darwin brushfire. NZ scientists begin helping Australia construct several desalination plants
In 2006, Australia and New Zealand make a deal to have New Zealand’s military use Australia’s oil and gas, and Australia will retrofit their navy to be entirely nuclear powered by 2026
In 2007, NZ and Australia’s navies become even closely intertwined.
In 2008, the Red Flu spreads through New Zealand, causing almost 70,000 deaths in 2008 alone. 
In 2009, more wind farms are made. Advances in solar power lead to panels covering the roofs of cities
In 2010, NZ has switched to a command economy that relies heavily on trade with Australia
In 2011, limits for livestock are made but are not outright banned like in Australia. The New Labor party returns. While Fraser doesn’t dismantle anything his predecessor made, he becomes more open to nuclear energy and also starts to militarize New Zealand more.
In 2012, a deal is made with Australia to exchange all of their oil to power NZ’s military. 
In 2013, New Zealand considers trading with Japan, and starts to negotiate with them. 
In 2014, New Zealand is shocked by the attempted invasion by China. Enlistment increases but not on the same level as Australia. Fraser begins talks with Dorrington to formally unify, though Fraser wants to ensure NZ’s autonomy. 
In 2015, the great heatwaves finally create enough sunlight for solar farms to become more viable. A massive solar farm begins construction outside of Hamilton. 
In 2016, Australia starts running out of oil, and so NZ switches to coal for their ships. Fraser starts reopening coal mines, but is extremely careful about it. 
In 2017, Australia and New Zealand officially merge into the Union of Australia and New Zealand. 
In 2018, a massive tropical storm leads to New Zealand to evacuating a large amount of refugees in the outlying islands nearby. They are resettled in north island. This wins Fraser a lot of respect with the Islander Party. 
In 2019, a scandal occurs between Fraser and Rhyder getting into a row over criminals. It’s revealed that Fraser has been sending convicts to work for the Australians. 
In 2020, Fraser resigns and a snap election causes Moana Iosefa Ngata to become PM. Ngata is known for causing friction with Rhyder over the ANZ navy policy. 
In 2021, the New Zealand armed forces are gradually retrofitted to use nuclear power. This causes protests with the armed forces, and NZ pauses their retrofits. 
In 2022, more seawalls are built. Australia doesn’t like how resistant the Islander Party is, and thus tries to influence the New Labor party. 
In 2023, Reuben Te One Kaipara, a maori sympathetic to the Australian cause, becomes PM. He engages in a PR campaign calling for nationalism, militarism, and nuclear power
In 2024, NZ has its first ever drought, and Australia intervenes. Kaipara works with Rhyder to make NZ’s infrastructure extremely interdependent on Australia’s. More desalination plants are built, and an underwater pipeline begins transporting clean water to Australia. 
In 2025, Australia faces a massive famine and New Zealand is forced to finally enact rationing to stabilize the food security. Kaipara works with Australia to look into colonizing Antarctica
In 2026, NZ is against war with Argentina. This causes a schism between the two countries, and Anahera Waimaru Tohu becomes PM, pledging greater autonomy of NZ’s military. After the solar storm, NZ offers to help rebuild Australia’s infrastructure and sends them massive amounts of aid, but is shocked when Australia becomes hell-bent on colonizing Antarctica. 
In 2027, Australia begins exercising much more control over NZ, and starts evacuating citizens to New Zealand, overcrowding the islands. People loyal to the Australian government and military are sent first, then regular citizens, and lastly refugees/aboriginals. NZ finds this repulsive, but a faction within them collaborate with the Australians in their war against Argentina. 
Misc Island Nations
Nauru (Population: 22,020, circa 2010)
Australia doesn’t mine that much phosphorus in Nauru during the Glorious Decades. 
In the 1990s, after the Crash, Australia begins a mining project there. 
Phosphate from Nauru is used to fertilizer in Australia. In exchange, Australia sends shipments of food to Nauru
In 2001, a military base is established on Nauru, along with a navy detachment to help protect it against pirates and refugees
A massive flood in 2007 leads to over 1000 deaths
A desalination plant is made in 2009
In 2012, vertical farms and cities are developed due to the rising ocean 
In 2018, Nauru is evacuated to New Zealand
Cook Islands (Population: 26,151, circa 2000)
Cook Islands is less corrupt during the Glorious Decades, with Thomas Davis winning fair and square in 1978
The US Military set up a few bases on the Cook Islands, but abandoned them by 1990
New Zealand sets up sea walls in the 1990s
Vertical farms and acrology keep them relatively well fed, but constantly raids and floods lead to New Zealand to evacuate them in 2001
New Caledonia (Population: 402,765, circa 1990)
A burst of violence erupted during later 1970s between the French and the indigenous Kanak independence movements.
France negotiated a deal for infrastructure building, tourism promotions, and gradual independence process in 50 years under the backing of Australia, New Zealand, and US
Tourism became a good income source for New Caledonians, but heavy nickel mining operations by the French, Americans, and Chinese began to damage the islands
The Crash happened, tourism revenue dried out, killing off at least 60% of the economy. The government had to heavily rely on nickel mining, which further devastated the islands
Due to the nickel mining operations, France reneged on the independence deal by 1990.
Violent civil war began in New Caledonia in late 1990.
France decided to abandon the islands completely by January, New Zealand evacuated pro-French New Caledonians and others by March, about 260 thousands, abandoning the rest of New Caledonians.
The drastic reduction of the population actually helped the new radical Kanak government with them needing to feed way less people. Still the damaged land meant they had to import food somewhere. Australia exported a bit to them (in exchange for nickel supplies), but not much else
The government had to ration food by 1992 and implementing authoritarian measures, causing further violence.
A major storm hit New Caledonia in 1995, destroying the Kanak radical government, the islands briefly fell into anarchy.
Order was finally reestablished after everyone (about 120 thousands) agreed on a truce
With such devastation, many abandoned the islands, the rest asked for a merger with Vanuatu in 1997, formally joining in 1998.
Australia forced Vanuatu to open New Caledonia for further mining due to nickel being very important. As a relieve, Australia will accept a percentage of displaced people with New Zealand but Vanuatu took the brunt of it
The storm and the mining devastation kept displacing more and more New Caledonians to Vanuatu, Australia, or New Zealand
Some remnants of the radical Kanak government tried to rebel against Australia when the Chinese tried to invade them. China basically went, “Cool then, you can join” but not really helping them.
Australia came back and restored order into the islands, continuing their mining operations.
Australia was forced to pull out of New Caledonia after a particularly destructive storm in the later 2010s, only evacuating their staffs and some collaborators, abandoning everyone there.
By 2027, New Caledonia were mostly abandoned and flooded with only estimated 1000-2000 people lived in Mont Panie.
Fiji (Population: 1,037,387, circa 2010)
Becomes independent as in OTL
Land ownership is a hot topic throughout the Glorious Decades, though Fiji still remains a tourist destination 
In 1987, the coups don’t happen, as everyone benefits from the increased tourism
After the crash of 1988, Australia and Fiji begin closely trading
In 1989, Australia begins prototyping more efficient farming methods on Fiji
A military base is established on Fiji in 1990
Reliance on Australia remains a tenuous topic throughout the 1990s, but as food shortages, rationing, heatwaves, droughts and natural disasters become more prominent, it dies down
Sea walls are built in the late 1990s
In 2004, Australia builds a nuclear power plant on Beqa Island
Refugee boats lead to military patrols in the late 2000s
In the 2010s, Fiji is entirely dependent on Australia, with the main island essentially completely devoted to farming. 
Between 2009-2014, Australian sailors would frequently take shore leave in Fiji 
After the invasion though, the nationalist government began investing less in Fiji. “self reliance” programs were planned
In 2018, New Zealand offers evacuations. Many leave, but a small number (roughly 100,000) stay. 
Between 2019-2023, New Zealand maintains contact with their outposts in Fiji but in 2024 they stop receiving communications. 
In 2025, New Zealand sends an expeditionary crew to find that Fiji has been swarmed by refugees
By 2027, the status of Fiji is unknown. 
Kiribati (Population: 232,499, circa 1990)
Becomes independent in our timeline, due to disagreements about tourism with the British
In the 1980s, Kiribati tries to become a tax haven. This is not as successful as they had hoped, and instead, they become a popular American tourist destination
In the late 1980s, overcrowding became a serious issue. High rise buildings were made in 1987 and early 1988, though only two were finished before the Crash of 1988. 
After the crash of 1988, the economy nosedives with homelessness and unemployment reaching the mid double digits. 
In 1989, rampant flooding and unprecedented weather forces Kiribati to plead with Australia and New Zealand to accept refugees 
In 1990, Australia only sends aid and tries to make a seawall, however, contact is lost in late 1990
An expedition is sent in 1991 to find out what happened to the Australian engineers and the rest of Kiribati. They find the island completely submerged, with the high-rises in ruins. Less than 1000 survived, and all given medical care and resettled in Australia
By 2027, the island is over 10 meters below the sea 
Solomon Islands (Population: 845,998, circa 2020)
Becomes independent as in OTL
Signs the Shanghai Accords, though this doesn’t really affect their economy much as they rely mostly on tourism
After the crash of 1988, disagreements of how land was to be allocated, in addition to island autonomy, leads to a civil war 
The civil war ends in a stalemate in 1990 due to a massive tsunami causing over 100,000 deaths
Australia comes in during the 1990s to help provide some aid, and they forcibly demilitarize the solomon islands to prevent further bloodshed. The Solomon islands are an important testbed for many of Australia’s technologies, each on a different island. Seawalls are first built along many of the island coasts, then a nuclear power plant is built Savo Island. A wind farm is built on Chouselle Island, and a solar farm is built on Rennell Island. A desalination plant is built on Guadalcanal. Australia builds several military bases on the islands, and sets up patrols 
In the 2000s, refugees from Indonesia and Papua New Guinea are the most common issue. 
In 2014, China attacks the Solomon islands on their way to Australia, leading to a naval battle that results in over 100 casualties and the destruction of the nuclear power plant. 
In the aftermath, Australia begins relocating citizens to other islands and gives them the right to re-arm, causing ethnic tensions to flare back up again. This leads to another civil war, and the anti-Australian rebels win, severing ties with Australia 
In 2018, New Zealand offers to resettle them. Some take this offer, while others remain in the heavily fortified islands. About 250,000 end up leaving for New Zealand. 
In 2022, ANZ helps defend the Solomon Islands against an incursion of pirates 
In 2024, storms and flooding become so destructive that the Solomon Islands navy organizes an evacuation to New Zealand. Only 500,000 people make it there, as several ships capsize. 
As of 2027, the status of the Solomon Islands is unknown
Vanuatu (Population: 446,019, circa 2010)
Becomes independent as in OTL, however the Coconut War with PNG doesn’t happen
Becomes a libertarian tax haven in the 1980s, and several companies open offices there, but it’s not as popular as Uruguay
After the crash of 1988, a socialist government is formed and it becomes increasingly authoritarian 
A large storm in 1989 leads to almost 50,000 deaths and the complete destruction of Port Vila
In 1990, Australian and New Zealand efforts to rebuild include making sea walls and establishing military bases. 
In 1996, a wind farm is built on Malekula
In the late 1990s, the former French Territory of New Caldedonia joins Vanuatu as a province 
In the 2000s, flooding in New Caledonia leads to overpopulation in Vanuatu. 
In 2009, a civil war almost happens due to the ethnic tensions resulting from the resettlement
In 2015, a civil war pops off, with a Ni-Vanuatu nationalist blaming the New Caledonians for the various issues they face 
In 2016, ANZ try to mediate a peaceful resolution but a New Caledonian separatist overloads a nuclear reactor in Efate and forces yet more migration 
In 2017, due to the environmental issues, New Zealand begins resettling Vanuatuans, though many refuse 
In 2018, many of them are wiped out in the tropical mega storm
In the 2020s, the central government of the islands fracture and each island is ruled by a warlord 
By 2027, half of the islands formerly known as Vanuatu are still inhabited, with a current population estimated to be somewhere below 100,000
Niue (Population: 2,048, circa 1990)
Became an autonomous region much like OTL
Tourism picked up in the Glorious Decades, though it remained very isolated and obscure
After the crash, Niue became entirely reliant on New Zealand for aid
In 1988, rationing and blackouts became routine
In 1991, as a result of a massive tropical storm New Zealand offered to evacuate the citizens to North Island, to which they agreed to
By 2027, it is abandoned, with frequent storms having completely removed all traces of human habitation
Tokelau (Population: 3,756, circa 1990)
Remained part of New Zealand’s dependant territory.
Tourism picked up a bit in the Fabulous Decades, but like Niue, they remained obscure.
Fishing became slowly reduced over time due to global overfishing
When the Crash happened, it remained closely connected with New Zealand
Due to its isolated position, New Zealand was struggling to communicate with Tokelau
As fishing dried out, Tokelau kept stumbling downward.
In 1991, a storm cut off Tokelau's communication. It took New Zealand a few weeks to mobilize their navy and try to reach Tokelau.
Because of the time needed, at least 800 Tokelauans died due to direct impact, diseases, or other causes.
The New Zealand rescue fleet coordinated with the government and they offered evacuation to the remains. They accepted.
By 2027, Tokelau was completely gone under the sea.
Tonga (Population: 211,310, circa 2010)
Tonga remains staunchly isolationist, not signing the Shanghai Accords 
Tonga also never democratizes, though it does slightly open up for tourism
Tonga also remains skeptical of fossil fuels, and even starts conducting research into climate projections (though they don’t get far) 
As a result, the crash of 1988 doesn’t impact them at all, and they occasionally trade with Australia and New Zealand
In the 1990s, the monarch Tāufaʻāhau Tupou IV solidifies his power, becoming more and more authoritarian 
In the 1990s, Tonga begins extensive programs to research ways to mitigate climate change. 
In 1996, Australia helps construct a sea wall along the borders of Tongatapu
In the 2000s, Tonga remains extremely isolationist, refusing to allow Australia to build a military base there. 
In 2011, strict rationing and declining quality of life due to frequent storms leads to a revolution deposing the monarchy, which spirals out into a civil war
In 2018, New Zealand warns them about the impending super storm and offers to evacuate them, however they find much of the island already abandoned. A handful of survivors (less than 100) are found and accept 
By 2027, Tonga is completely abandoned 
Tuvalu (Population: 21,754, circa 1990) 
Became independent as in OTL 
It remains a popular tourist destination in the 1980s
However, Tuvalu is extremely vulnerable to climate change, and in 1987, a tropical storm results in widespread damage 
As a result, Tuvalu’s government takes out massive loans from the IMF and tries to rebuild 
Foreign aid dries up in 1988, and the government begins negotiating with neighboring countries for aid 
Australia offers to build a sea wall in 1989 in exchange for building a military base there. Tuvalu accepts. 
By 1991, the sea wall was successful but wasn’t tall enough and after Funafuti floods in 1992, they negotiate with Australia and are evacuated to the northern territories. 
Many Tuvaluans die in the great fire of 2005
By 2027, Tuvalu is completely under water and forgotten to history 
Palau (Population: 25,982, circa 2000)
Gained independence from USA as OTL
Tourism soared during the Fabulous Decades, mainly from Japan, US, and other spots.
Coral bleaching began in the 1980s.
USA spend a fair amount of money into Palau
When the Crash happened, global tourism plummeted as a result, Palau lost about 25% of its GDP by the end of 1989.
The Morgan Administration tried their best to prop Palau up, but it kept declining.
When the Graves Administration started, aid to Palau was cut by 50%, further destroying Palau’s economy. By 1992, at least half of Palau is unemployed
Increasingly humid and worse rains made Palau harder to live on. The Graves Administration offered Palauans relocation to Hawaii. Some took it, but most didn’t.
The Graves Administration finally pulled the plug out for Palau completely by 1995, ending American influence in Palau.
A particularly devastating rain season wrecked Palau in 1998. New Zealand offered evacuation to Palauans. Most took it and left the islands.
The rest were prey to pirates who established their dens in the islands.
By the 2000s, the increasingly humid conditions made living in Palau almost impossible.
By 2027, most of Palau was abandoned with only 100s people left.
French Polynesia (Population: 418,789, circa 1995)
France built up French Polynesia for tourism during the Fabulous Decades
Many Polynesians were employed for civil administration too, the French military was pulled out mostly since no nuclear test was ever done anymore.
During the Fabulous Decades, the islands weren’t completely thriving, but it was still relatively well.
When the Crash happened, tourism dried out, cutting off a major source of income for the islands
Subsidies also began to dry out, further worsening the economy. By 1992, at least a fifth of the population was unemployed.
Agriculture was boosted as a way to support the territory’s dying economy. Land was getting worse due to overfarming.
By 1995, due to the sheer distance, France finally pulled the plug out too, evacuating mostly metropolitan French, about 110.000 people from the territories.
The new Republic of Polynesie was shakily declared in 1996. The new government was very shaky with conflicts between various islands and people. It was not expected to last long.
The government collapsed in 1997, barely a year after its declaration. Polynesie was split into multiple states, with the biggest centered in Tahiti.
Overfarming led to less food coming and conflicts began to erupt in former French Polynesia.
Many French Polynesians immigrated to their neighbours to try to find a chance of a better life.
A big storm hit the islands in 1998, devastating them further.
New Zealand contacted some communities in 2000, offering evacuation. At least 55,000 people were evacuated.
By 2027, the status of French Polynesia is unknown.
Wallis and Futuna (Population: 16,723, circa 1995)
Still part of France per OTL, the French also tried to build up tourism in the territory.
Due to its closer distance with Australia, tourism picked up more than French Polynesia, but they were competing with big ones like Fiji and the rest.
They also sold fishing rights to Australia, Japan, New Zealand, US, and others. Like others, concerns of overfishing were silenced.
When the Crash happened, tourism dried out as a result. At least a third of the territory’s economy dried out in instant.
The French government tried to prop out the territory, but overfishing ruined the local waters. Many tried to eke out a living.
A revolution happened in 1996, deposing the traditional government system and they declared independence from France. The deposed locals fled to New Zealand, about a third of them.
The new government was very shaky, eventually collapsing in 1998 when a storm hit the capital. The territory fell into anarchy.
The islands were open to pirates in the region after that by 2000.
In 2010s, a pirate lord took over the former territory. Unlike the Samoan pirates, they chose to be more conservative in their actions.
When the Samoan Pirate Showdown happened in 2015, the Wallis Pirate Lord saw their chance when both sides were devastated. Raids into Samoa intensified.
By 2020s, the Wallis Pirate Lord had fully taken over Samoa.
By 2026, the Wallis Pirate Lord was forced to pull over from Samoa because of the worsening situation.
By 2027, the Wallis Pirate Lord was killed. The status of the former territory was unknown.
Samoa (Population: 308,268 ,circa 1997)
Retained the name Western Samoa still
With investments from New Zealand, the Samoan government built up tourism infrastructure for the Fabulous Decades
Several Japanese companies set up shops in Samoa, not as polluting as others, but starting to do so
By the 1980s, tourism was booming and the economy was rapidly diversifying from agriculture.
When the Crash happened, tourism dried out, resulting in an economic crash for Samoa. Exports also began declining, resulting in worse economy.
A fungal blight devastated Samoa’s taro and other agricultural production in 1994.
With the collapse of the agricultural and tourism sector, Samoa was forced to be totally dependent on New Zealand’s aid by 1995.
Violent protests and uprisings began to occur by 1996 by people who wanted a better life.
A major storm destroyed a lot of Samoa in 1997. New Zealand offered them evacuation. At least two thirds of the nation was evacuated.
Storms and rising sea level wrecked what was left of Samoa, leaving it open for pirates.
By 2010s, a thriving pirate den was established in former Samoa.
By 2027, the pirate den almost collapsed, the former nation in total anarchy.
American Samoa (Population: 66,930, circa 1997)
Still part of US like OTL
Tourism was beginning to be developed more serious than OTL by the end of the 1960s.
Better airline services and trained workers resulted in better tourism industry in the territory than OTL
Multiple American and Japanese tuna cannery companies set up shop here. Any concern of overfishing was silenced.
By 1988, the territory standard of living kept rising.
When the Crash happened, tourism dried out, cutting out at least a third of the territory’s economy. The government was forced to send more aid to the territory.
The tuna cannery companies tried their best to keep going as usual, but slowly they went bankrupt. By 1993, all companies had shut down.
The Graves Administration also cut aid by 50% to American Samoa, worsening the economy.
Like in Western Samoa, violent protests and uprisings began to occur in 1996.
The 1997 Samoan Storm also hit American Samoa, devastating the territory.
The US and New Zealand government offered to evacuate separately, at least two thirds accepted.
By 2010, like former Western Samoa, former American Samoa was another hub for pirates. Former American Samoa in particular was controlled by one who was hostile to the Western Samoan pirates. They wanted to reunite the Samoa.
In 2015, they had a showdown in the sea between, only to be hit by a storm. None of them survived.
By 2027, the former territory fell into anarchy, status unknown.
Marshall Islands (Population: 63,754, circa 2000)
Gained independence from US as OTL
Economy remained fairly small, tourism isn’t as developed as other Oceanian countries
They instead sold their fishing rights to other nations including the US and Japan.
Overfishing became a prominent problem in the 1980s but the local government was paid to ignore that.
They imported more things to help raise the standards of living of the islanders. US helped them by giving them millions of dollars in aids.
When the Crash happened, due to them not relying on tourism, their economy wasn’t badly impacted.
Increasing demand of fish lead to further overfishing, devastating the local fish population
Things got worse when the Graves Administration came and cut off their aid by 50%. Their economy fell down hard.
Due to storms, the concrete dome in Runit Island was breached by sea water, releasing radioactive contaminants into the local ocean. Fishing was soon banned in the area, destroying the islands’ economy.
With worsening conditions, the government offered for evacuations to Hawaii. The Islanders accepted and most were evacuated.
By 2027, it was totally flooded, lost to history.
Micronesia (Population: 153,178, circa 1989) 
Still part of USA by the Fabulous Decades started 
By 1979, the process of independence started, but US is still heavily controlling the region. Full independence is agreed in 1990, 4 years later than OTL
US built a lot of tourism industries in the area, tourism boomed as result
Phosphate mining also began in the region, starting to contaminate the area
The Crash happened, tourism dried out as a result.
US awkwardly tried to dance around Micronesian independence issues, finally decided on retaining the region, not giving them full independence due to their phosphate
Protests began to erupt in the islands due to US’s decisions, sometimes they had to broken up violently
However, before things could go even worse, the storms made the Graves Administration offer evacuations to Hawaii for Micronesians. Some accepted, reducing the tension in the islands.
Mining operation made the water around the islands increasingly contaminated, Micronesia had to import way more food from US
Finally with the increasing cost of mining, imports, and distance from the mainland, the Graves Administration gave them full independence abruptly in 1996. They evacuated every Americans and any willing people to Hawaii, abandoning Micronesia.
Independent Micronesia barely chugged along until 2000s when it finally collapsed after the capital was hit by a violent storm.
Micronesians fled to southern islands and even further south.
By 2027, the only Micronesians left were in the mountains of the archipelago, numbering only a few hundreds left.
Japan (Population: 74,471,234, circa 2020) 
In the 1970s, much to the US’s chagrin, Japan drifts towards socialism
In 1974, Kakuei Tanaka doesn’t get caught and is considered to be a paragon of Japanese politics
In the 1970s and 1980s, Japan doesn’t increase their military spending as the threat of military conflict with China and the USSR significantly dies down
Between 1975-1980, relations with the US are soured but President Morgan makes it a point during his second term to restore ties
Japan recognizes Chen’s PRC as the sole government of China in 1979
In 1980, after signing the Shanghai Accords, Japan starts to become the largest car manufacturer (using Chinese plants) 
In the 1980s, Japanese politics revolved around free trade vs protectionism
In 1981, Japanese National Railways is privatized and split into seven different companies. By 1988, they have all been bought by the same conglomerate 
In 1983, Mt. Oyama volcano erupts, which is advertised as a “once in a lifetime event”
In 1984, the president of Ezaki Glico Co., Ltd., is held hostage and ransomed for one billion yen. He later escapes and fights his way out of the compound, singlehandedly before collapsing on the street and dying from a heart attack. Later investigations find that he was held hostage by an alliance of organized criminals from South Korea and Taiwan. 
In 1985, Japan airlines flight 123 falls into the ocean. All passengers survive. 
By 1986, union membership is at 0.3% in Japan. Mount Mihara erupts and over 2 million visit Japan to watch the magma flow
In 1987, a rail mega project is completed and connects the Japanese rail lines from Fukuoka, Japan to Busan, South Korea, and Wakkanai, Japan to Shebunino, USSR
By 1988, Japan has been very reluctant to integrate free trade with other nations, as they still protect their industry. 
After the crash of 1988, due to Japan not relying ENTIRELY on exports, their economy doesn't completely cave in until 1990. 
In 1989, the Fukouka-Busan rail line is destroyed for “self defense purposes”
In early 1990, in response to the USSR’s increased aggression, the Wakkanai-Shebunino rail is also destroyed
A new prime minister is elected in 1990. He promises to fight against the aggression of China and the USSR, and rebuild Japanese industry. Japan’s rail system is also refurbished
In 1991, Japan begins a policy of rationing coal and other energy sources
In 1992, a new political party, the Self-Reliance Party, is formed. It is a big tent party that focuses on economic recovery for Japan, and later self-defense in the wake of China’s aggression
In 1993, unions start to make a come back, though the government regulates them 
October 25, 1994 - Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution is officially repealed, and the Japanese military begins to slowly be built up again
December 31, 1995 - By this date, all people in the countryside are ordered to evacuate so that farms can be built. Research into vertical farms starts
In 1996, suicide becomes the most common cause of death
In 1997, the last automobile manufacturer finally closes down and switches to making replacement parts for trains
In 1998, fishing vessels in the Sea of Japan are now routinely escorted by increasingly large numbers of Japanese navy boats
December 31, 1999 - All cars are banned in japan 
In 2000, strict rationing is implemented, with many elders voluntarily forgoing entire meals 
In 2001, coal and oil shortages result in Japan looking into nuclear power as its main source of energy (Japan never outright banned nuclear power after TMI, instead, oil was just simply cheaper). Relentless recycling and trash collection campaigns burn millions of tons of trash to keep furnaces running. 
In 2002, flooding destroys much of outer Tokyo, leading to over 4 million missing or dead. Flood walls begin to be built, but it’s slow
In 2003, a massive famine causes almost 4 million deaths and Japan begins recycling the dead for food for the poorest of the poor. These “emergency rations” are manufactured under the guise of “fish patties”. Many pets are eaten around this time, and an outbreak of a zoonotic disease in Kyoto forces them to be quarantined for the rest of the year 
In 2004, the entire countryside is dedicated to farming. The first major nuclear power plant built after 1988 opens on the outskirts of Tokyo. It is cooled by sea water
In 2005, Soviet prisoners escaping a gulag in Siberia spread the Red Flu to Japan, causing a policy of “national quarantine” and entire cities to shut down, leading to the economy almost completely crashing
October 4, 2006 - The Japanese Emperor is reported dead. The government claims that he had died of old age, but when many other government officials died, it became obvious that he had killed himself. As a result, many elders follow his example to free up resources for the newer generations
October 5, 2006 to February 22nd, 2007 - As more and more people commit suicide, die of starvation, or die of the Red Flu, civilization on the Japanese islands almost collapses. It is estimated that almost a third of the population dies during this time. With so many people dying, infrastructure begins to break down. Emergency services are overwhelmed, and the police are stretched thin. Anarchy spreads when entire local governments all commit suicide. A small group of public servants, later known as the Steward Society, work at great cost to get the country functioning again. A nuclear power plant outside Noshiro goes critical due to the staff all committing suicide, and 12 brave people sacrifice themselves to prevent it from going nuclear
February 21, 2007 - The Third Sino-Japanese War starts: the first PLA warships are sent to Japan. This causes the remnants of Japan to snap out of their collective ennui and start to work together again. Factories begin to produce military equipment. Cars and other metal objects are recycled for use in the military. Trenches are built all along Japan’s west coast. Tokyo is under siege for seven months. Stories are told of soldiers willingly walking into their death to protect their comrades. Due to shortages of medical supplies, Japan begins a tradition of the elderly and seriously ill to voluntarily refuse medicine to save it for younger people
By 2008, Japan has lost almost 10 million to the war with China. Fighting in the trenches has led to a specialized martial art being developed, called “The Way of the Honorable Eel”. Swords are also common, along with using captured chinese weapons. Alcohol is banned for recreational use, and dedicated solely to sanitizing things
By 2009, Japan has rearmed itself and begins to go on the offensive after fully kicking China off the islands. Naval battles in the East China Sea result in many losses for China
April 1, 2010 - The Third Sino-Japanese War ends in a stalemate. The Steward Society becomes the official government of Japan. Due to the large amount of pollution in the Glorious Decades, over 90% of people over the age of 55 have some sort of health issue, the most common one being blindness. As more they begin to teach the younger generations essential skills for keeping the country functioning (mainly on how to maintain equipment), they are granted “seeing eye people”, to help them navigate the world and also to serve as their proteges. 
March 11, 2011 - A massive earthquake hits Japan. Almost half of the remaining elders die, either due to being trapped, suffering a heart attack, or being swept into the sea. The Steward Society struggled to regain a hold on the country, and for a short while the island of Kyushu declares independence. The Steward Society simply starves them out, and they return like nothing happened by the end of the year. Fears of overfishing cause Japan to enforce strict fishing quotas, with people found guilty of lying being executed in public
Sometime in 2012, water begins to be rationed for better use in irrigation. Research into desalination begins, but is slow, as a vast majority of who is still alive by this point is either incapable of conducting the research, or is uneducated 
In 2013, the Steward Society begins drafting up plans for a second major nuclear power plant, this time outside of Gifu. People found evading their work duties or attempting to commit suicide as an easy way out are publically shamed. Japan also starts trading with New Zealand, though the long journeys make it very slow and time consuming
By 2014, almost all fossil fuels are exhausted, and Japan prioritizes them for use in agriculture 
In 2015, during the Great Heatwaves, millions more die from dehydration and suicide. The average age for someone in Japan is 34 years old. 
In 2016, riots due to working conditions, food rations and housing culminate in the Steward Society declaring nationwide martial law, with the police regularly shutting off services to cities that are prone to unrest
In 2017, sea walls are constructed around much of Tokyo, Kyoto, Gifu and Kobe. An outbreak of an unidentified zoonotic disease causes many livestock to die, with strict regulations to keep the remaining ones isolated and alive
In 2018, Japan begins importing solar panels from New Zealand
In 2019, the Steward Society opens their first school, the “Academy of Japanese Governmental Stewardship”, and industrial accidents begin to finally decline for the first time in over 10 years
In 2020, advances in arcology due to the sharing of knowledge with New Zealand and Australia leads to more efficient vertical farms, and the last “fish patty” is made on April 4th
In 2021, due to widespread birth defects, the Steward Society bans births until 2030, after which the policy will be reevaluated 
In 2022, Japan buys several nuclear powered navy vessels from Australia
In 2023, The Steward Society begins a project to collect, record, and organize every technical manual and piece of literature they can find, and they begin to create bound “sacred books” that contain tons of useful information about operating the many machines that keep Japan functioning. Fearing an invasion from China or the USSR, Japan begins building military bases along their western coast 
In 2024, during the second great heatwaves, famine and drought cause Japan to import tons of water from New Zealand. Very little actually makes it to Japan. 
In 2025, the Steward Society begins a project to see how long Japan will remain able to support life. The results are horrifying: due to the rampant pollution, industrial accidents, birth defects, and shrinking amount of arable land, Japan is projected to be incapable of supporting its current population by 2100. 
In 2026, Japan attends the AoN conference in Patagonia, and is skeptical of colonizing Antarctica. Regardless, the secret branch of the Steward Society begins planning a contingency plan should a major famine/disaster cause the country to collapse yet again. That happens during the Solar Storm of 2026: the entire country grinds to a halt, as fires and electrical failures cause an unknown amount of deaths and entire cities stop functioning. Half of the Steward Society’s High Council (the ruling body, headed by a Prefect), is killed in the resulting chaos, and the secret branch takes control and authorizes their emergency plan: an invasion of Kamchatka. 
By 2027, the Steward Society is desperately struggling to keep Japan from collapsing in on itself. Suicide rates are the highest they’ve ever been, and desertions are common. The remnants of the military are working at breakneck speed to try to determine what equipment is functioning and fixing the rest, and are preparing to invade the far eastern USSR. 
Indonesia (Population: 395,549,893, circa 2000)
Indonesia signs the Shanghai Accords in 1973
Indonesia also does not encourage family planning
Treatment of chinese indonesians is also better than our reality 
In 1975, Indonesia, being threatened by the UN, does not annex Timor. Instead, they hold a referendum, which they are caught rigging, and Timor remains independent 
In the 1980s, Indonesia's economy grows rapidly 
In 1983, after being re-elected, Suharto actually faces criticism that he isn’t going far enough, so he further opens the country and implements several Singaporean-inspired policies 
In 1988, Suharto quietly sides with Egypt during the Sinai War
After the crash of 1988, Suharto tries to go business as usual but by August 1988 the economy starts to rapidly collapse 
In 1988, Indonesia covertly supports West Malaysia 
In 1989, Suharto tries many policies to try to reinvigorate the economy, including privatizing many things 
He also builds up the military, citing Soviet aggression, the civil war in PNG, and Singaporean refugees 
By the Hot Summer though, this doesn’t work, and after entire small islands are evacuated, he starts to blame the issues on too many people 
Indonesia is the first country to place limits of families, starting in 1990
After China invades Mongolia, Suharto conveniently starts to blame the Chinese Indonesians 
In the early 1990s, ghettos are built for Chinese Indonesians and they aren’t allowed to have kids, and families are separated 
In 1991, a large farming company lobbies the government to use Chinese Indonesians as slaves in farms, Suharto agrees 
Suharto supports the Malaysian warlords against the Chinese communists
In the 1990s, laws are gradually repealed, and civil rights are lost. 
In 1992, Indonesia signs a pact of mutual defense with the Philippines 
In 1993, a country-wide curfew is in effect
Martial law is declared in 1994
In 1995, Suharto suspends the constitution, and declares himself president for life
In 1996, Working with various businesses, Indonesia is reorganized so that certain islands are turned into “farming zones”, essentially giant labor farms/prisons for criminals/chinese minorities
In 1997, a militarized border is set up in Borneo 
In 1998, citing the anarchy in PNG, Indonesia annexes them
Between 1998-2003, Indonesia is turned into a police state, and while they do have enough oil for people to drive cars (being pretty much the only country to not have to worry about oil) people are constantly being relocated due to storms, causing much civil unrest 
In 2002, in response to the Indian-Pakistani nuclear war, Indonesia becomes even more repressive, with rations given for loyalty 
In 2003, a failed uprising in PNG leads to civil war starting, with Borneo, Sumatra, and Java all having a battle royale 
Suharto is killed in 2004 by a disgruntled general 
By 2010, the civil war has solidified into Sumatra’s government, which has the most food and is allied with West Malaysia, Borneo’s government, which is allied with East Malaysia and is the most stable, and the Java government, which is quickly falling to anarchy 
By 2013, all of PNG has been taken over by rebel groups
In 2014, China comes through and attacks much of West Malaysia and Sumatra, while Philippine refugees crowd Borneo, leading to further civil war factions 
By 2015, Java is anarchy and is being abandoned 
In 2016, massive heatwaves and floods prevent agriculture and reports of cannibalism circulate 
By the 2020s, the various factions of the civil war are fighting for their own survival, with many of the surviving areas being taken over by warlords and pirate kings
During the second great heat wave, the remnants in Borneo try to take over East Malaysia, they fail 
By 2027, the only relatively functioning part of Indonesia is the rebel base in PNG, which is a left-wing authoritarian confederacy 
Between 2003-2027, many islands are flooded and abandoned, leading to over 100+ million deaths between 2003 and 2027
Malaysia (Population: 45,675,921, circa 1980)
Malaysia’s New Economic Policy is very successful at eliminating poverty and wealth inequality based on racial and religious discrimination 
China also strongarms them into treating their Chinese with dignity 
Throughout the 1970s, China and Malaysia work very closely together to rapidly increase both of their economy, with China focusing on manufacturing while Malaysia focuses on logistics, supply lines, and shipping. A large remote call center industry pops up in Malaysia
In the 1980s, Malaysia teeters on being socialist, similar to OTL China, but still encourages free market economics 
In 1981, Malaysia signs numerous trade deals with other countries, including the UK and the USSR 
In 1982, Malaysia focused entirely on industrialization, with farming communities receiving expanded taxes for not “moving the country forward” 
In 1983, the monarchies are officially disbanded, with many of the royals renouncing their claims to rule, but some refuse to do so and go underground
In 1984, a conservative Islamic politician is assassinated for advocating closer ties to the USSR (in a similar vein as Iraq) 
By 1988, peace negotiations with the radical islamic and maoist groups leads to a short peace
Unrest occurs even before the Crash of 1988, as Arab sympathizers begin large scale protests during the Sinai War, the pro-Chinese government suppresses these
After the crash of 1988 and the nuclear war, many moderates and Chinese move to the eastern side of Malaysia, as the unrest reaches a breaking point and people start to be executed en masse for being “Traitors to Islam” and the few Malaysian jews are persecuted. In East Malaysia, rationing is introduced due to the tight spaces
West Malaysia declares independence in August 1988, creating the “Islamic State of Malay”. This is recognized by only a few minor African islamic countries, and many view the remnants of Malaysia in Borneo as the “true” Malaysia 
Between 1988 and 1990, the two Malaysias stabilize. East Malaysia manages to stave off total economic collapse, as they had not entirely industrialized (plus their call centers were in Peninsular Malaysia) so they do okay. West Malaysia’s economy completely collapses, as many foreign investors pull out, and most of its industry falls apart, causing a massive famine in 1990 and West Malaysia to fall apart into several dozen statelets controlled by various warlords 
In 1991, East Malaysia launches an invasion into West Malaysia to try to retake it. East Malaysia’s economy collapses, and switches to a socialist economy 
In 1992, the invasion is going okay, much of the eastern coast of West Malaysia has been retaken by government forces, however a massive tropical storm in the South China Sea devastates the Riau Islands (the government forces’s main staging grounds) and forces the government forces to retreat, returning to Borneo
In 1993, in response to the Borneo faction in the government, plus the communists in Thailand winning, a warlord starts conquering other parts of West Malaysia, bringing over half of it under his control. He starts retooling factories to produce weapons of war, and begins launching skirmishes into Thailand, Indonesia, and even plans to raid East Malaysia
China, in response to such a hostile power so close to home, invades Thailand and cites the instability in Malaysia as one of the reasons why they took over Thailand. 
Between 1994-1999, every time China tries pacify West Malaysia, a Jihad is called and it always ends with the rebels being slaughtered en masse in retaliation. By 2000 China has largely given up, though they have burned the coasts down multiple times 
For East Malaysia, they are invaded by factions in the Indonesian civil war, before finally being annexed in 1998. 
In the 2000s, West Malaysia becomes a theocratic dictatorship and remains extremely repressive and agrarian, engaging in smuggling and piracy operations until collapsing into anarchy in 2011 during the Purple Summer. East Malaysia, siding with Indonesian rebels, launches their own nation, called the People’s Republic of Borneo
In 2010s, flooding in Borneo causes many to migrate to the north
In 2015, a massive forest fire burns down much of West Malaysia, reducing it to a charred wasteland. 
In 2016, Borneo is invaded several times by Indonesian government forces, but they manage to win out every time. Strict rationing and low industrialization allows for Borneo to not have to resort to cannibalism, but malnourishment and disease are the leading causes of death
Between 2017-2023, government incursions become less frequent, as refugees/pirates become a pressing concern 
In 2024, disagreements with other rebel factions against Indonesia (such as the factions in Sulawesi and New Guinea) cause a civil war between the rebels and Borneo’s authoritarian government finally slides into a dictatorship
In 2026, during the solar storm, a large forest fire burns down much of Borneo, leading to a civil war and famine
By 2027, Borneo is in civil war, while West Malaysia is a wasteland 
Philippines (Population: 223,830,595, circa 2000)
Martial law is declared as in OTL
However, the US and China try to negotiate to help open up the country more so that they can have better access to their mineral resources 
The US offers to help catch the Maoists (China’s hands were tied due to the Shanghai Accords), and a sort of low-intensity analogue of the Vietnam War happens here 
By 1976, as one of Nixon’s last diplomatic goals, he helps the conservative Filipino government regain control of the south. 
Between 1976-1981 Marcos remains dictator, until President Morgan begins the process of opening up the country to strengthen supply lines in the region. China becomes the largest investor into the Philippines, though a large tourism industry also takes off.
In 1984, Eduardo “Eddie” Santillán Robles becomes the President of the Phillipines, and martial law is finally lifted 
China’s investments in the mid 1980s cause huge amounts of pollution and a minor famine in 1988, though the government imports lots of food from Cambodia to make up for it. 
In 1989, Robles very narrowly wins a second term, and the conservative government actually tries to tackle the resulting depression and climate change effects through the free market. Throughout 1989 and parts of 1990, various sea-walls and proposed farming methods are tested, with contracts being sold to the highest bidder. He also calls the US a “coward” 
The Hot Summer of 1990 puts a stop to this, as the last sectors of the economy completely shut down due to rampant energy shortages 
Afterwards, Robles simply starts implementing rationing and other emergency contingency plans 
Left over coal mines are dedicated to running the left over industry in the capital islands near manilla, and other islands are basically left to starve 
Riots over food shortages and other problems are met with police brutality 
In 1992, after the Taiwan invasion, the Philippines becomes extreme isolationist and paranoid 
In 1994, an "Independent” politician who is totally not a socialist runs for the presidency, and Robles contests the results. 
In 1995, citing China and the USSR’s expansion, plus the socialist politician, Robles declares martial law and suspends the constitution, and purges the government of anyone who isn’t 100% on his side 
Between 1995-2000, work camps are set up, with entire islands turned into glorified prison farms. Political prisoners are forced to work their sentences off there. After 1995, insurgents fight a guerilla war with the government 
In the meantime, the Philippines keeps building up its army to ridiculous levels, fearing a Chinese invasion. The army becomes so big that over 10% of the entire population is an active member. The Police are no longer the primary form of law enforcement, as the armed forces routinely patrol cities and also serve the role of emergency responders 
After 2002 and the Indian nuclear war, plus the Chinese constantly shipping stuff to Africa, the Philippines switches to an entirely war-based economy 
In 2003, a massive monsoon destroys Manilla and Baguio becomes the capital of the Philippines 
Throughout the rest of 2003 and 2004, huge numbers of people are forcibly resettled, and this causes families to be separated 
In 2005, on the 10th anniversary of Robles declaring martial law, a group of rebels take over a labor camp and free the prisoners, kicking off the Filipino Civil War
By 2011, the two groups are divided in roughly the same way as they were in the 1970s 
The war causes many to die and also frequently causes crop fields to be burnt, with millions dying of famine 
By 2015, the war has boiled down to who can feed their citizens better. Rebels start executing suspected traitors on the spot, and the north does the same. Both sides stop taking prisoners, and dozens of boats leave everyday, trying to flee the brutal civil war. Many die at sea. 
In 2016, Robles dies from respiratory complications and causes a succession crisis, as many in the pro-government north kill each other in a game of thrones style squabble. Around the same time, the socialist south sees several islands declare independence and stop sharing their resources with the main rebel government in Valencia, causing more infighting and the Valencia government launching a costly campaign to take back the rebel islands 
In 2017, the main rebel island of Samar is destroyed in a huge monsoon, and both sides fracture farther 
In 2022, a random colonel in the pro-government forces begins a campaign to reunite the north under a single banner
By 2024, he is successful, and begins a plan to retake the south 
Between 2024-2027, his campaign continues, and he finds that much of the south has collapsed due to frequent flooding, with only a few, isolated city-states remaining 
By 2027, the Philippines might actually end its civil war, but the country has been left in ruins and frequent storms and freak weather events make habitation costly, but still possible 
Singapore (Population: 7,152,345, circa 1980)
Literally the exact same as OTL until the crash of 1988
A massive tsunami destroys Singapore, forcing many to evacuate and flee to Malaysia, Indonesia, and Indochina
Throughout the 1990s there are several attempts to reclaim Singapore, but the government gives up by 1997 and instead settles in East Malaysia
In the 2000s, Singapore has become a sort of "Venetian pirate haven” 
In the 2010s, progressively larger storms cause many to leave the region
In 2015, the Malaysian Jihad burns down the ruins of Singapore 
In the 2020s, more and more ruins are washed out to sea
By 2027, Singapore is completely forgotten to history
Papua New Guinea (Population: 23,892,670, circa 1990)
In the 1970s, Australia takes a less active approach to governing PNG
In the 1970s, many previously uncontacted tribes are studied by anthropologists around the world (though they take care to not spread diseases to them)
Bougainville and the North Solomons end up gaining more influence in PNG, as mining operations expand across the island
After PNG becomes independent and Australia leaves, the lack of training and education is exploited by the Bougainville Mining Company
Between 1975-1988, the government of PNG is very unstable and corrupt, with frequent accusations of election fraud, voter intimidation, and cheating in elections
During all of this, Bougainville Mining Company, now renamed to Pacific Copper Company, starts gaining control of local areas 
A constitutional crisis in 1980 causes PNG to be reformed into a confederacy, with some areas being so autonomous that they were practically independent 
In 1982, the PCC lobbies to have election deposits increased so that only those rich enough can run for office
In 1983, tribal conflict becomes so bad, that PCC lobbies for the armed forces of PNG to protect their interests. Mercenaries from around the world also join in, and briefly, many people think that PNG will be the site of the next major proxy war
In 1984, in the vacuum left by the armed forces and law enforcement, many gangs start to take over smaller towns. These gangs later ally themselves with Triads and similar gangs from Asia, and also rebel groups from Indonesia
In 1985, this culminates in the Siege of Port Moresby, in which a coalition of various governments (Namely China, Australia, Indonesia and the United States) launch a peacekeeping mission to wipe out the numerous crime gangs and insurgents. PNG is placed under martial law, and a major politician (coincidently the former CEO for PCC) becomes the interim leader
In 1986, under the guise of pacification, huge amounts of the island are destroyed in intensive strip mining operations
In 1987, many in PNG began to see increased poverty as their resources were siphoned away to Indonesia, India, and China
In 1988, PNG is hit very hard by the crash. Many of the rich leave to other places, causing an even bigger brain drain. The federal government effectively collapses, and many towns are controlled by local gangs. This spirals into a far-left nationalist movement, supported allegedly by the Soviet Union. 
In December 1988, the PNG civil war starts with the Bougainville Uprising. Using construction and mining equipment, partizans take up arms and march to Buka. 
By April 10, 1989, the civil war is over, with the People’s Army of New Guinea having taken over the country 
In 1989, Australia offers aid, however the new government declines this
Between 1989-1992, heightened by the Hot Summer, the government of PNG slowly fractures from corruption and mismanagement, much like the previous one. Food shortages, black outs, and famine from overexploitation lead to the country breaking apart into several fiefdoms and city states, mainly based on tribal identity 
By 1993, PNG is in anarchy 
In 1998, Indonesia annexes PNG for their resources 
In the 2000s, various rebel grounds in Indonesia are sent to work as convicts in PNG
In 2003, a failed uprising leads to many attempting to flee for Australia, some make it
In the 2000s, PNG becomes the headquarters for the new resistance movement against Indonesia. Many are forcibly resettled here. 
In the 2010s, PNG becomes the most stable region of Indonesia, with a loose alliance of city-states and islands forming a left-wing anarchist confederacy 
Between 2016-2023, PNG takes advantage of the chaos and starts supplying weapons to people fighting in the civil war, in exchange for oil
During the second Great Heatwave, PNG almost falls to civil war again, with numerous islands flooding and refugee crises 
By 2027, PNG is on the brink of civil war again, and the various factions are preparing to fight over the last habitable zones 
Brunei 
Gained independence in 1984
Lasted a very short time, was notably corrupt between 1984-1988
In 1988, it fell to civil war
In 1989, it was absorbed by East Malaysia 



Bangladesh (Population: 282,577,001, circa 2000) 
Became independent in 1972
Becomes closely aligned with the USSR in the early 1970s, and as a result the dictator isn’t assassinated 
Throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s, the US and China try to open up Bangladesh
In 1981, they finally become democratic, and sign the Shanghai Accords
In the 1980s, Bangladesh becomes closely aligned with China, with many people leaving to work in super factories 
After the crash of 1988, Bangladesh starts negotiating with China for aid, but then they are approached by Savateev who gives them a few papers proving the ethnic cleansing of the muslims in China who refused to renounce their faith. This leads to an “Islamic Revolution” similar to what was going on in the remnants of the Middle East 
In the 1990s, Bangladesh launches several insurgencies into China before India and China make an unlikely alliance and wipe out Bangladesh 
India annexes Bangladesh in 1999
Bangladesh ends up being a pyrrhic victory, as there are practically no natural resources, the energy infrastructure become non-functional in 1989, and constant flooding cause mass migration 
As a result, after the nuclear war in 2002, Bangladesh becomes an anarchic wasteland controlled by neo-maoists, islamic socialists, remnants of the Indian government, gangsters, bandits, rebels, and pirates 
In the 2010s, Bangladesh stops being capable of any agricultural support resulting to a culture of smuggling and raiding nearby shipments 
In the 2020s, a cult of cannibals have taken over the ruins of Bangladesh 
By 2027, much of Bangladesh is a wasteland 
Sri Lanka (Population: 32,874,281, circa 2000) 
In 1971, the JVP socialists insurrection fails, and causes socialism to be banned in all forms in Sri Lanka
In 1972, a joint US-Chinese commission helps stabilize Sri Lanka, with India protesting
On 22 May 1972, the Republic of Sri Lanka is formed, and the first free elections are held later that year
In actuality though, it is a one-party state with very little social services, leading to many to emigrate in the 1970s 
In the 1980s though, Sri Lanka becomes a hotbed for tourism and mining, and the economy starts rapidly expanding as China and India both invest heavily in Sri Lanka’s infrastructure, both trying to gain influence over the other
The civil war is narrowly avoided but a low-intensity insurgency takes place from 1983-1988, with the Soviet Union supposedly funding them at the start. 
This terrorism gradually ramps up to an international hostage crisis in May 1988, distracting much of the world from the Sinai War
On June 8th, 1988, President King and the President of the European Commission, Baron Friedrich von Schwerin of West Germany, had successfully negotiated the return of all foreign nationals and ended the hostage crisis. 
After the crash of 1988, immediately after the hostage crisis, while the rest of the world is focused on the aftermath of the nuclear war, the far-left Tigers of Tamil launch a full on civil war. Sri Lanka’s government initially holds their own until funds dry up in the aftermath of the crash, and the Soviet Union begins sending guns to the rebels
The fighting continues for some time, with India supporting the Sri Lankan government, until the government forces run out of supplies during the siege of Colombo due to an Indian Famine due to the Hot Summer, and the government surrenders to the socialists 
Later that year in 1990 the Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka is formed, and all the shortcomings and resource shortages are blamed on the past government 
This new socialist government quickly turns into a totalitarian dictatorship, with soviet-style gulags and rationing implemented. Power shortages and brown outs, along with the dictator focusing on agriculture, makes the industry stagnate completely 
A major famine in 1994 causes Sri Lanka to threaten to invade India, and India finally relents when they give them aid 
This continues for some time, with Sri Lanka raiding nearby ships, and India eventually building up several military bases along the coast
In 1999, the dictator of Sri Lanka finally launches an actual invasion into India, though they get wiped out really fast, with Sri Lanka being annexed by India in 2000. 
From 2000-2002, India begins salvaging operations to scavenge metal from the old rusting equipment 
After the nuclear war, some remnants of India’s government hide out on the island but are all overthrown/killed in rebellions and have no influence on the island by 2010
In the 2010s, some scavenging operations are set up by China and Food, Inc, but constant rainstorms, typhoons, and even tornadoes devastate the island
In the 2020s, flooding starts to claim large amounts of the island, with the last remnants abandoning their outposts
By 2027, Sri Lanka is a storm-ravaged wasteland picked over by only the most desperate of scavengers 
Nepal (Population: 42,233,498, circa 2000) 
Panchayat system is developed as in OTL
Nepal becomes a chess game played between India and China, China wants to use their population as a cheap source of labor while India wants to keep them Hindu
The referendum in 1980 results with the Panchayat system being dismantled, and a constitutional monarchy being established
The Shanghai Accords are signed in 1981, and the government is dominated by two parties: the Royal Party (supported by India) and the People’s Party (supported by China) 
Throughout the 1980s, many people emigrate out to India and China for job opportunities 
After the crash of 1988, Nepal ends up signing several deals with India and becomes closer to them, with China doing several "military exercises” along the border
In 1989, the pro-China faction begins several “uprisings” against the Hindu government, India sends them supplies and helps “police” the Maoists 
In the Hot Summer of 1990, the civil unrest escalates into a massive civil war, with India and the USSR supporting the Nepalese against the Chinese
In 1991, spillover into India leads to India officially annexing Nepal 
In the 1990s, Nepal becomes a massive military base for India. Due to the climate and worsening pollution, some high-ranking members of the Indian government and military make apartments in Nepal 
In the 2000s, after the nuclear war with Pakistan, Nepal becomes a military outpost and enclave for the Indian government, with pro-government forces trying to regain control of local areas. 
Between 2003-2011, various campaigns have tried to retake parts of India, but in the end, these campaigns make no headway and by the Summer of 2011, a revolution happens and the “Indian Emergency Regime of Nepal” collapses into civil war
By 2015, Nepal is severely depopulated, and there are some holdouts but for the most part it is abandoned 
By 2027, a few bands of scavengers and raiders fight over water in the peaks, who have long that civilization ended in 2002 
Bhutan (Population: 896,597, circa 2000) 
In 1972, Bhutan forms close ties with Bangladesh 
In 1974, the plot to assassinate the current king is found out and as a show of power, the king executes the would-be conspirators 
In the Glorious Decades, Bhutan remains a relatively poor place, playing Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh off each other. Indian and Malaysian tourists frequently visit. 
In 1989, a revolution against the king leads to several Indian nationals to be held hostage. India negotiates with them, and almost invades Bhutan, and a socialist republic is established 
In 1990, massive famine and heatwaves cause the socialist government to almost collapse, and smuggling between India and China becomes the main sector in the economy
This new socialist government lasts for a very short time, as in 1991, another revolution happens and a group of radical buddhists take over and create a totalitarian theocracy, claiming that the world has ended and that everyone must reincarnate to their next stage in life 
In the 1990s, insurgents of these radical buddhists frequently spill over into China, India, and Indochina. This leads to India invading and annexing them in 1997
Between 1997-2002, Bhutan is basically a giant detention camp ran by India 
After the nuclear war, the radical buddhists “free” the locals and use Bhutan as their base of operations. 
Between 2003-2015, the buddhists launch tons of insurgencies and some become bandits/cultists in the Indian wasteland
During the Great Heatwave of 2015, all the remaining members of the cult all commit ritual suicide 
By 2027, Bhutan is occasionally picked over by bandits and scavengers 
Seychelles (Couped by Mercenaries in 1981, turned into a Capitalist “Paradise” shortly afterward, with Tourism playing a massive role. Of course the local nature is absolutely devastated by this, but very few care at the time as even the locals, reduced to little more than a nation of maids, janitors and maintenance workers, enjoy prosperity that would make many Westerners jealous. ,,Mad Mike”, the Mercenary Leader of the country, frequently fuels the economy with his own cash that he brings back from various adventures abroad. When the Crash hits his advisors convince him that they must seal off the country from the rest of the world, and after seeing the shitfest happening everywhere, he begrudgingly agrees. Before long all tourists are given a simple choice - leave NOW, or join them and stay forever. Most choose to leave, and tend to regret that choice. He tries to turn the country back around, but nature is too devastated to support the population even as it, which leads him down a very, very dark path. Pretty much, the Seychelles adopts Social Darwinism as a state policy - Black or White, the weak die, and the strong prosper. Everyone works, and those who can’t anymore are killed. The sheer scale of the death makes “Mad Mike" completely snap and go along with the insanity, eventually proclaiming himself King (His Majesty Thomas the First, Long may he Reign) in 1999 to universal approval among survivors. Increasingly senile, he becomes little more than a sockpuppet in the hands of various Chancellors, with the Island wrecked by storms forcing an increasingly large chunk of their population to go underground or as far inland as possible. After Mad Mike dies in 2017 due to all the pollution, his niece Bree O’Mara takes charge as Queen Brigid the First, long may She reign. Yes, the Long May He / She reign part is mandatory to say each time their names are mentioned. Either way, she rolls back some of her uncle’s more loony decrees and even institutes a form of consensus decision making. By 2027, the population only consists of a couple thousand somewhat gaunt people squatting in ruins and living underground, but they’re surprisingly organized, and while rations mostly consist of gruel and the occasional stale shit, they’re regular and reliable. Not shown on most maps, as the world kinda just assumes everyone is dead, like in the Maldives and Cape Verde.
Maldives (The Monarchy was still abolished in 1968. Under President Nasir, it quickly developed, modernizing its finishing industry and investing heavily into the booming tourist industry. Various luxury resorts are created which service foreign tourists for eye wateringly low prices, while investments into television and Public Relations ensure that both foreign dignitaries and local officials alike know that this prosperity is the work of Nasir and Nasir alone. After some negotiations, the Maldives Government buys the Gan Airport from the British with a fraction of its profits and subsequently negotiates an agreement with China to feed their Megafactories with Maledivan Fish, avoiding any economic shocks and further fueling their growth. Nasir remains President and grows increasingly authoritarian into the 80s, but avoids any rash idiocy so as to not scare away tourists (who’d like to buy a cabin next to a death camp?), mostly focusing on political assassinations abroad. However, cracks begin to show as early as 1987 as overfishing and mass tourism mean the supply of fish dries up, and some complain of there being too much trash on the once pristine beaches. Once the crisis hit in 1988, the economy completely collapsed and food riots shook the country. A group of private mercenaries overthrew the Government but struggle to actually rule on any level above ,,Rape, pillage and burn”. The Indian Navy heads over to the Islands to try and restore order, but only shells the Capital, killing much of the ,,cabinet” and starting a series of devastating fires. They are soon the least of the survivors’ worries, as a hurricane destroys several Indian vessels and completely annihilates whatever remnants of the Mercenary Regime survived. With mass famine and a collapse in law and order, the Maldives were mostly abandoned by 2000, with storms subsequently wiping it clear of any life above bacteria by the turn of the decade. Not shown on maps anymore.  
Pakistan (Population: 352,501,542, circa 2000)
Overall more aligned with China
In 1974, following the humiliation of Pakistan by India and Bangladesh, the Balochistan civil unrest escalates into an all out war, supposedly supported by Iran and the USSR. 
In 1975, Pakistan is placed under martial law
In 1976, the rebels win and take over the country, creating the Islamic Socialist Republic of Pakistan. Many members of the failed iranian revolution fled to Pakistan later on. Several socialist, but religious, policies are made: All schools and education are free, but all schools are state owned and teach the values of “Islamic Socialism” 
In early 1977, martial law is lifted, though Pakistan becomes a theocracy much like Iran ITTL
In 1977 and 1978, the USSR covertly helps Pakistan develop their nuclear weapons, with their first detonation taking place in 1979. 
In the 1980s, Pakistan covertly helps support the USSR in Afghanistan
After TMI though, Pakistan stops building nuclear power plants and focuses on building nukes solely as deterrence 
In the early 1980s, Egypt and Iran keep trying to get Pakistan to open up to free trade, but the USSR advises against it
In 1983, after Agassi’s corruption scandal, Pakistan signs the Shanghai Accords 
Pakistan leaves COMECON and joins the Arab League, becoming closer to Egypt and Saudi Arabia 
Pakistan strongly resists Qatifism, as the theocratic dictator of Pakistan views it as a threat to his power
Pakistan makes a lot of money selling and manufacturing weapons for the war in Afghanistan 
In 1988, Pakistan openly supports the Egypt Coalition, though does not participate in the Sinai War
In 1988, after the nukes drop, Pakistan initially helps supply Iranian revolutionaries overthrow the Shah, along with the USSR
In 1988 they also organize evacuations in Oman and UAE
This quickly gets out of hand though, as in 1989, Pakistan starts to be flooded with radioactive refugees. Protests and demonstrations by the refugees turn violent, and Pakistan starts to close itself off
Pakistan starts promoting “National Islamic Socialism” and places the country under martial law 
In 1990, a massive border wall is built along the border with Iran. In response to Voronin’s aggression in Afghanistan and Iran, Pakistan fears invasion by the USSR and wishes to keep their sovereignty, so they restore the nuclear plan
In 1991, after a massive famine, Pakistan severs support to West Malaysia
In 1992, the theocratic dictator is killed by his men and a military junta is established, with much less an emphasis on Islam and more about keeping the country together 
In the 1990s, the armed forces start shooting border crossers on sight, and refugees that were welcomed just a few years ago are now rounded up and executed 
By 1993, overindustrialization and exploitation of the land in Pakistan leads to a huge famine and drought, with pollution blocking out sunlight for months at a time. The Military Junta blames India 
In 1994, Pakistan starts building up their military near India’s border 
In 1995, famines cause Pakistan to become increasingly reliant on fishing to feed their people 
In 1996, family planning is enforced and rationing is implemented on water and energy 
In 1997, in response to the massive unrest in Asia, Pakistan starts trying to curry favor with the USSR, but it’s too little, too late. Excessive pollution in Lahore causes the entire city to be evacuated, with temporary housing made Multan
However, a massive landslide in 1998 causes over 4 million deaths due to poorly constructed buildings, and the military starts considering invading India to gain access to their land in Punjab 
In 1999, extreme drought, desertification, and storms causes Pakistan to abandon Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan, with over 350,000,000 people crowded into the Indus Valley, which is being devastated with flooding, landslides, and famine 
In 2000, an attempted coup on the military dictator forces Pakistan to rethink their land allocation, and risking a war with China and India, they send people to be resettled in Gilgit-Baltistan
In 2001, Pakistan starts to prepare for war with India
In 2002, Pakistan invades India through Kashmir, then through the Indus valley. Pakistan makes it to New Delhi and that’s when India launches the nukes. Pakistan strikes back, and manages to hit major indian cities, but the remnants of the military are wiped out when Kashmir is saturated with nuclear bombs. Much of Pakistan’s side of the Indus River Valley also is wiped out
Throughout 2003-2005, various pockets of Pakistani resistance wage war on Indian forces before being wiped out from lack of supplies or dying of radiation poisoning 
By 2010, Pakistan is a nuclear-ravaged wasteland, incapable of supporting life, though there are some outposts at the base of the northern regions 
By 2017 though, these last remnants of civilization collapse into anarchy and warlordism, with Indian raiders frequently attacking them 
By 2024, most of the glaciers in Kashmir have melted, filling the Indus River Valley with radioactive chemicals 
As of 2027, much of Pakistan is completely abandoned, absorbed by the Great Asian Dust Bowl
India (2,539,738,784, circa 2000)
Overall more aligned with USSR
The Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 happens as usual, however, casualties are far fewer - only 1,500 casualties total on both sides 
In 1972, India does not sign a treaty with the USSR, instead remaining non-aligned 
They view the intervention in Sri Lanka as upsetting the balance of power, and pledge non-aligence 
In the Glorious Decades, India invested equally in agriculture and industry 
India goes ahead with the White Revolution (overhauling its dairy industry) and prioritizes huge amounts of land for cattle grazing 
In the Glorious Decades, using growth hormones developed by European countries, India becomes the leading producer of milk 
In the Green Revolution in India, instead of investing in things like fertilizers and creating more resilient crops, they focused on things like herbicides, pesticides, and automating the agricultural industry with heavy machinery. While this did solve their food crisis, they became entirely dependant on fossil fuels
India also develops more efficient irrigation techniques, including purification facilities (that again are dependant on fossil fuels) 
Stubble burning becomes very common all the way back in 1974
The Emergency happens (1975-1977), with her opposition supposedly being supported by the USSR
A series of strikes in 1975 and the supreme court decision leads to Indira Gandhi declaring a state of national emergency, and basically putting India under martial law. This strained the already low food supplies
China helps to root out the Maoist insurgents 
The Emergency focuses more on the economy and worker’s rights, as opposed to stuff like poverty, the environment, and family planning
Raj Narain is publicly executed in 1976
India’s economy only goes down however, due to them not being able to compete with the New China
Over double the amount of demolitions were carried out (300,000+) leading to over 2 million to be displaced
The Emergency ends in 1977, and elections are called. A new pro-free trade politician wins in a landslide. His name is Raghunath Prasad Malhotra, and he is viewed as the “father of new India” 
Malhotra accuses Gandhi's administration of rampant corruption, and dismantles many programs with the promise of rebuilding them from the ground up, free of corruption
India attempts to stave off their money problems, but by 1977, they give and sign the Shanghai Accords, and reluctantly open up to investment from China. Malhotra also practically removes the Licence Raj
India is in a unique position however - they are not a one-party state like China, but with their huge population, they cannot go full ancap or risk an uprising. They delicately oscillate between currying favor with the USSR, and with the USA/China
Malhotra also focuses on improving relations with Pakistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal and Sri Lanka
China starts building car factories in India, though Malhotra minimizes the amount of control China has over them 
Malhotra is re-elected in a landslide in 1982
In the early 1980s, India is forced to open up many sharecropping initiatives with foreign owned farms, such as ones owned by Brazil, Argentina, USA, France, West Germany, UK, Canada, Italy, Norway, China, USSR, Australia, ect
Malhotra takes a much more peaceful stance on the Punjab insurgency: he allows Sikhs to immigrate to Bangladesh or Pakistan, no strings attached, peacefully
Indian companies, trying to usurp China, tries to invest in Sri Lankan mining companies 
In 1981, India and Indonesia sign multiple trading agreements in an attempt to usurp China
Throughout the 1980s, both China and the USA attempt to entice India into their trading blocs, but India wants to essentially lead their own
In 1982, immigration laws are relaxed to help entice more workers to come to India to work in factories or fields
The Sikh Riots in 1984 are far more peaceful, with only one person killed by accident 
The Bhopal Disaster in 1984 is small enough to be covered up, and instead the company dumps their chemicals in the major rivers in the area. Only 35,000 people are injured 
In 1987, Malhotra is re-elected, and this time, he starts to promote a more nationalist vision for India, with India taking China’s place as the dominant industrial power in the world 
By 1988, less than 1% of India’s farms are owned by Indian companies 
India remains neutral during the Sinai War
After the crash of 1988, India’s economy rapidly collapses, with their agricultural industry nosediving. Malhotra, viewing this as India’s chance to take the world stage, instead tries to pass tax cuts and other things to stimulate the economy 
In late 1988, tensions between Pakistan, Bangladesh and Malaysia form against India, as Pakistan (and later Bangladesh) side with the Egyptian Coalition and start to promote radical Islamic Socialism 
In 1988, India signs a treaty with Nepal
In 1989, trade deals with Indonesia lead to India keeping its agricultural system running, but many companies become bankrupt and close down, and foreign investors leave by the millions
While Malhotra remains calm, level-headed and relatively rational, his opposition, Raghavendra Pratap Singh, claims that it is because of the radical islamists that doomed the world, and India. He promotes extreme protectionism, nationalizing foreign owned businesses in India, and also creating more socialist policies 
Malhotra focuses on helping Bhutan, Nepal, and Sri Lanka, and Singh uses this to shit talk Malhotra 
Everything cascades in 1990 when a massive famine, due to storms preventing the shipment of Indonesian oil, cripples India. Pollution, chemicals from pesticides, and soot from wildfires all come together to create “the fog”, an extremely dense cloud of heavy gases that blocks out the sun for almost 14 months. Social unrest due to resource shortages escalate to riots, and troops are recalled from Nepal and Kashmir to deal with the unrest. Visakhapatnam is almost burned down in a massive oil fire. Martial law is declared. 
By 1991, unrest has grown to such a degree that Malhotra is assassinated and Singh declares himself “Emergency Minister” 
Singh mobilizes the army and works with China to “pacify” the Bangladeshi insurgency, then takes over Nepal
Singh completely re-organizes the economy, with all industry being dedicated entirely to either agricultural production, essential materials, or for the military. The armed forces sees a massive recruitment drive, with incentives such as better food, less cramped quarters, and “forwarding Indian pride” 
India begins threatening China (and later Pakistan) with nuclear weapons under Singh
Nepalese water helps feed India’s irrigation systems, with Nepal becoming a heavily militarized territory
By 1994, India has been reformed into an ultranationalist dictatorship, barely staving off chronic famines, and becoming extremely militaristic. Sri Lanka keeps harassing India for supplies, with Singh not viewing Sri Lanka as worth it to invade at the time, worrying about becoming open to invasion by China or Pakistan while their back is turned
In 1995, muslims are carted off to "re-education camps” where they work farms. Malaysian and Bangladeshi refugees are shot on sight. Military bases are built up along the border with China and Pakistan
Throughout the 1990s,”the fog” occasionally reforms over large cities, but it never lasts more than three months. During those times, the government mandates shelter-in-place orders and provides gas masks 
By 1997, things get out of hand when India launches an invasion into Bhutan, citing their Buddhist insurgency as a threat to the Indian people. This causes mass protests, despite the totalitarian state, and India fractures into a civil war
Bhutan is turned into a giant detention camp, where rebels are detained
Between 1997-2002, the “Pro Democracy Alliance”, seeking to depose Singh and restoring democracy, wages a guerrilla war with India’s government. Supposedly, they are funded by China and Pakistan 
The PDA is responsible for numerous terrorist attacks and industrial sabotages, leading to over 20 million in deaths and a massive industrial accident 
India invades and annexes Bangladesh in 1999, citing fishing rights
Sri Lanka also tries to invade India, and Singh launches a campaign to annex Sri Lanka in 2000
As it turns out, “The Fog”, combined with the sabotage operations of the PDA, caused a mass breakdown in industrial capacity for India and they begin scavenging operations in Bangladesh and Sri Lanka
By 2001, the government really only controls the coast and the cities along the Ganges, with much of the interior of the country in anarchy, controlled by the PDA, or completely abandoned 
Near the end of 2001, after torpedoing a fishing boat and this escalates into a full-blown war with India
In January of 2002, Pakistan, using The Fog as cover, launches a war into India through Kashmir
Between January-April, India and Pakistan fight of Kashmir, India’s huge military helps them maintain an edge 
During the summer, Pakistan retreats from Kashmir and starts burning crop fields in Punjab and Haryana
In September, Pakistani forces encircle New Delhi and burn it down, causing Singh to launch nukes at them 
Much of Pakistan’s government is destroyed, and Singh’s government moves to Meerut
Between 2002-2007, India’s government tries to regain control of the country, but the nukes have led to over a billion dead and large swathes of the country to die off. Many claim that Singh is no longer the leader of India, and the civil war escalates further
The factions are: the Bangladeshi Provisional Government, the Sri Lankan Enclave, the Nepalese Emergency Regime, the North India Authority, the Western Union (controlled by the PDA) and the Southern Alliance (controlled by a series of warlords) 
Many of these governments lose contact with each other, and apocalyptic suicide cults spring up across the wasteland 
In 2007, China kills Singh and starts dividing up India 
The faction in Sri Lanka is wiped out in 2010, and Nepal’s government is deposed in a revolution in 2011
By the time Food, Inc arrives in 2014, India is just a series of isolated city states on their coasts. The largest of these is the Keralan Junta
Between 2014-2020, interior India devolves into an anarchic wasteland controlled by cultists, cannibals, raiders, and smugglers 
In the 2020s, many in India openly practice cannibalism. A new religion has taken off - a sort of apocalyptic fusion of Buddhism and Hinduism, and the act of cannibalising someone is ritualized 
By 2027, much of India is dying off, as the last bits of arable land are being corrupted by chemicals from the Glorious Decades or the nuclear wear. Many are killing themselves, and those that don't are cannibalistic cultists who frequently attack each other. Along the coast, some settlements survive with minimal cannibalism, instead raiding nearby ships, but that is becoming an increasingly rare occurrence. The Keralan Junta is the region with the least amount of cannibalism, though everyone is starving and dying of water-borne diseases or radiation 


Benin (Remains ,Dahomey”. Constant Coups mean OTL’s communist regime does not stay for long, but nobody bothers to invest - what’s the point if next week’s regime will just nationalize it back? Still, by 1985, it mostly calms down, and Dahomey surprisingly begins to emerge as a somewhat liberal state - one with a developed (although heavily corrupt) welfare net and a semi stable Democratic System (even if one plagued by political assassinations). The 1986 Elections (Presidential and Parliamentary are held concurrently) are, surprisingly, seen as Free and Fair by most observers, even if there’s a few irregularities further inland where Government control is not as strong. The newly elected young President is quite popular, and nets more than a few positive comparisons to the Kennedys. That said, he does mostly focus on internal affairs and self sufficiency, which does cause the Opposition to nickname him ,Robinson Crusoe" but he doesn't care. However, he is too late, and the 1988 Crash absolutely fucks up Dahomey’s Export based economy, causing unemployment to skyrocket and his popularity to plummet to the Mariana Trench. He tries to dissolve Parliament and rule by decree in 1989, but the Military Stages a counter-coup to ,,Protect Democracy” - the subsequent 1990 Elections return a Presidency and Legislature dominated by the Armed Forces, and later suffrage is limited to members of such, but Dahomey does remain somewhat stable during the Red Decade, even if it’s piss poor. However, the 2000s bring with them waves of Sahelian Refugees trying to flee Southward, and the Army, while they fight valiantly, simply cannot beat them back (especially not after whatever remains of the Sahel’s militaries also gets the memo and flees Southward). The country falls into chaos, and much of Porto Novo burns down in unclear circumstances. By 2010, not shown on most maps, although the survivors (usually on isolated farmsteads or stranded deep in the savanna) do live somewhat comfortably… by medieval peasant / Food, Incverse standards.
Burkina Faso (Still known as Upper Volta. The country goes through its usual growing pains, aka coups, in the 60s and 70s, but most are relatively bloodless. The 1974 Famine shocked the populace, leading to the creation of a generally stable Marxist State. In 1984, after a corruption scandal, Captain Thomas Sankara came to power - in a relatively Democratic Vote inside the People’s Party. In the aftermath he does a lot in the way of famine prevention, all while trying to imitate the USSR’s version of "Developed Socialism”. Human Rights are actually somewhat respected, and corruption was rooted out. By 1988, the Crash doesn't impact the country all that much, and it remains an isolated fortress of relative calm, mostly trading with its neighbors (many of whom are reluctant, but beggars can’t be choosers) and slowly developing its domestic Industries, trying to put an end to subsistence farming and bring Agriculture into the 20th Century. They do a bit of trade with the Cubans, but not too much. Sankara’s Anti Famine Plans and Backups mean that the encroaching Sahara doesn't have too much of an impact, but they are nevertheless forced to take action when constant droughts begin to quite literally wither away at the Agricultural Sector. Dozens of farms are abandoned, and many farmers need to be literally kept at gunpoint to prevent them from leaving. This makes them increasingly resentful toward the Government and provokes a few quickly crushed peasant revolts. The Regime slowly retreats closer and closer to the Southern Borders (even encroaching into their mostly nonexistent neighbors’ territory from one point onward), although they do so in a controlled manner, successfully evacuating who they can and moving agriculture backward with them. They are aware this cannot go on forever, though, and by 2010 there are two factions emerging inside the Politburo - one that wants to leave some people to die and another that wishes to send them on near suicide missions to reestablish farms in the interior. In the end, someone spikes their water supply with poison and decapitates the Government on Christmas Eve of that year. Surprisingly this doesn't cause total collapse, but instead a somewhat healthy transition to ‘Democracy’ - sure, there’s still one party (the Prosperity Party, which is the old People’s Communist Party but with a new coat of paint) but there’s now more freedom of speech and press for the 3 literate folks left. They even hold a Presidential Election in 2020, although it’s more of a referendum than anything since they only let one guy on the ballot. By the Great Death, Upper Volta is perhaps the last somewhat functional state in Africa save the GAR, and although in crippling poverty and with corruption slowly creeping in, it’s still far from the worst place to be. 
Cape Verde (Never became Independent. Remaining a part of Portugal, with the Lisbon Government helping the locals clean up their own authoritarianism, letting the territory become prosperous and less corrupt far earlier than in OTL. Hungry for more cash, the Portuguese encourage tourism in the area, which works wonders. By 1980 it was one of the most popular spots in the world, having a somewhat friendly competition with the Maldives for the top one seat. Having more money than they knew what to do with, the Regional Government invested in creating a massive hospital / laboratory to try and mass manufacture a cure for Malaria. They… somewhat succeeded, as their method was efficient but horribly expensive, even for the Glorious Decades. When the Crash Came in 1988, their Tourist industry survived longer than most, but attacks from African Marauders cut that short as well. The Hospital caught fire in 1992 and was never rebuilt, mostly serving as a massive slum for the growing unemployed population, whom the Government refused to eject - where else would they go, anyways? Much of the local populace is dead or leaves by 2000, meaning the Chain is mostly inhabited by European Federation higher ups (who have luxury houses in the area), their Servants (sometimes the poor of their respective countries, coaxed into signing very unfair deals, sometimes the remaining locals with no other way to maintain themselves) and the Hospital Hobos, who have now formed a Commune. The Hobos launch an offensive in mid 2003, and they technically succeed, as they capture the Island - however this doesn't mean shit as it was in Summer and all the Higher Ups were back home. The Federation Navy successfully blasts the ,,People’s Militia” (a mix of the Hobos and deserting servants) into Kingdom Come, but other than a few missions to recover personal items from the now desecrated and shit-stained Mansions, they don’t bother to reestablish a foothold. Much like the Maldives, the islands are frequently wiped clean with large storms, leaving little evidence of human habitation aside from the occasional foundation or a half decent amount of rubble strewn around. Everyone except the European Federation no longer bothers to show it on maps (Brussels is not going to give up, and they insist on including the deserted chain in official documentation).
Equatorial Guinea (See below)
Gabon (The Gabonese Democratic Bloc emerges victorious over the Military in 1963 without French aid, and subsequently they form a somewhat healthy Two party System with the Democratic and Social Union (GDB and GDSU, for future reference). Of course there’s some corruption, and a few Presidents need to be dragged out of office to protect Democracy, but all in all things could be worse. In the 70s Oil was discovered, and once GDSU took power in 1972 they exploited it to its full potential, using the money to fund a "welfare state”, although a better term would be “corruption system”. The GDB adopted this style once regaining power in 1980, and used the good foreign situation to take more loans and quickly develop the countryside. The 1988 Elections, though, are cancelled due to the Arab Israeli War, which makes many in the GDSU call foul play, claiming this is a disgraceful sham meant to delay the GDB’s Defeat. Protests begin on the streets, and by 1989 they escalate into an outright revolution, with GDSU higher ups taking power and quickly proving incapable of ending the crisis. They were overthrown by the Army in 1991, who in turn grew corrupt as well and had to be crushed by the Navy and Marines in 1993. Seeking to save their collapsing economy, the Navy Regime adopts a red coat of paint and begins to beg around for aid. Moscow is not interested, but Beijing sure is, and before long whatever Jungles remain and haven’t burned down yet are shopped down to satiate the Tiger’s endless hunger. Of course, this has predictable effects on the local environment, but the land is soon repurposed for mass agriculture and the tribesmen are recruited to either work the soil or head to the newly opened Factories. Of course, the pollution and desertification made the soil completely useless by 2005, at which point the Chinese packed up and left, causing yet ANOTHER Revolution, this time by the Police Force. The Police Junta  struggles to keep order and, after many, many ration decreases, is toppled yet again in 2010, this time though the ,,Rebels” crumble into infighting, causing the South of the country to turn into a bunch of overpopulated, squabbling warlord statelets (the North was mostly abandoned by that point). Not shown on most maps by 2020, although some do bother still.
Gambia (Remains decently democratic throughout the Fabulous Decaces, with an Anti Corruption Campaign in the 80s and growth thanks to international aid and exporting peanuts. Their agricultural production means they aren’t quite as hard hit by the 1988 War as some other nations, even if Elections are indefinitely postponed and rationing imposed. Due to sticking with an (at least on paper) Free Market Democratic System they’re invaded by Senegal in 1997, and do not stand much of a chance. By 2027 they’re one of the more well off parts of Senegal, providing its populace with food, even if production has declined since its peak as a result of Climate Change and the decay of farming equipment. A lack of modern pesticides doesn't help during a particularly bad insect flood in 2019, but they manage to pull through.)
Ghana (After allegations of corruption, the Military coups the Government in 1966, and is subsequently overthrown in 1972, with Democracy restored, only to be overthrown again in 1979. There are also plenty of failed coups sprinkled throughout. The Economy grew at a somewhat stable pace in the 70s, but slowed down in the early 80s due to crop fires and overpopulation, only picking up after 1986, when the President promised democratization in exchange for international aid and loans. By 1987, the country was already Africa’s fastest growing economy, even if troubled by corruption and uneven distribution of Government funds. A few days before the planned 1988 Elections, the Arab Israeli War goes Nuclear, and the President returns to Autocracy. That said, he fails to meaningfully tackle the collapse of international trade, and is toppled by the Navy in 1992. The new dictatorship is just as corrupt, but even more incompetent, and bungles its way from one crisis to another until 2000, when it’s removed by a group of Communist Plotters aided by China. In turn, China begins to invest a bit in Ghana, but only on the coastline, and in ,,secure” locations. They left by 2007, plunging the country back into poverty. Before long, the capital becomes a charred battleground, with seven different regimes (all of different political affiliations) taking charge between 2008 and 2010, and by 2011 the only somewhat stable part of the country is the Ashanti Republic - a breakaway not recognized by anyone, consisting mostly of farms protected by levies with stolen military equipment. That said, even they fall by 2020, leaving the land devoid of centralized Government and mostly consisting of small groups of scavengers or isolated farming villages. Not shown on maps by 2015.
Guinea (it remained in ruins during the early 60s, isolated from the West and with the French having destroyed a ton of infrastructure on their way out just to spite the new Socialist Government. Guinea changes sides between the USSR and China a couple of times, and unlike the rest, where the two mostly try to outbid one another by building infrastructure and sending intellectuals, this time they do it the old fashioned way by trying to stage coups. The country sees seven coups between 1960 and 1980, but only one is successful - in 1973, which sees the Pro Soviet regime toppled and replaced by a Pro Chinese One, that subsequently opens up to the West. Now that France has pretty much ditched NATO, the USA accepts them and begins properly investing. Guinean food becomes a staple for many lower class families across Latin America - ones that can afford foreign goods every once in a while but not spend too lavishly on it - and Bauxite production skyrockets. Infrastructure is built up and even a small tourist sector begins to exist on the countryside, showing interested Westerners and Chinese Higher Ups the many, many remnants of Medieval Empires and Colonial Times. When the 1988 Crash Comes, the Chairman proclaims martial law, expels all foreign influences and tries to pretty much enact an autarkic command economy. The results are mixed - famine is prevented, but quality of life quickly declines, and the few freedoms the locals had are erased as the Secret Police reigns rampant and without any sort of oversight. In spite of the warning signs, the Chairman refused to open up to China in the 90s and 2000s, and Guinea remains the ,,Black spot of Africa”, relying on outdated infrastructure and mass propaganda that wouldn’t be out of place in Mao’s China. By 2009, the people had had enough, and after word spread that the Chairman might be ill (he was actually dead, but for a few days the Government hesitated to spread the word) people took to the streets. They are crushed, but manage to destroy much of the ancient equipment the country had relied on for so long, causing mass poverty as shortages of essential goods shake the countryside and cities alike. The Regime tries to use this as an excuse to further crack down on “wreckers”, but this only results in the Army getting tired of the circus and overthrowing the Second Chairman in 2012. The Third Chairman, the former “People’s Minister of War” tries to make amends with the Chinese, but by that point they are not interested. As the interior desertifies he makes the tough decision to ditch it, evacuating as many people as he can to Conakry, subsequently making it one of the largest cities on the Continent - a title it wouldn’t keep for long, as a big chunk of the new arrivals die due to fire, disease, starvation or crime. By 2027 the Regime surprisingly still has a decent grasp on some of the inner regions of the country, and remains ,,Socialist” even if in name only, although as the Third Chairman withers on the vine (the few remaining doctors suspect some type of cancer) already many are beginning to sharpen knives and prepare to take on the role of Brutus behind the scenes.
Guinea-Bissau (Becomes independent in the mid 70s after a bloodless revolution. In spite of its Centrally Planned Economy, it remains quite prosperous for the first half of the Glorious Decades, with free schooling, a well educated populace and even social programs aimed at uplifting the countryside and emancipating women. By the late 80s, though, they’re beginning to lag behind, and even started a few early experiments with controlled economic liberalization when the crash hit. The experiments are immediately shelved and the state goes right back to the usual. By the mid 90s the situation had further deteriorated with long food lines and shortages of clothing. In 1998, the Government was overthrown by a popular revolution, but the newly formed ,,Democratic Transitional Regime” doesn't even last three months and is removed by the Military in January of 1999. The Army tries the usual approach of ,"hit the problem with the butt of your gun until it goes away”, which does not work, and their rampant deficit spending only causes more poverty, inflation and a loss of faith in the state. In 2005 a younger General (although old enough to actually know how to read and write) stages a coup against his peers and even agrees to build a singular Chinese Clothing Factory in the capital (China is already planning to pull out, and Guinea Bissau has no real easily available natural resources other than its slowly shrinking agricultural sector). He subsequently continues ruling with a firm but mostly gentle hand until his death in 2022, at which point he is succeeded by his former Minister of Agriculture, who even stages a snap election (one in which he is the only candidate, and people throw pebbles into boxes with his name due to a shortage of paper) to entrench his legitimacy. In 2025 he allows for a Parliamentary Election, even if the newly drafted constitution pretty much makes the ,,Supreme Commander” (a fusion of the Presidency, Prime Minister and Speaker) to sideline them if he so desires. The Election sees all 30 seats won by Pro President Independents, and by 2027 Guinea Bissau is actually a half decent place to live, if one ignores the semi frequent shortages of food (although ones that cause “only” malnourishment, and very rarely cross over into famine) and still rampant authoritarianism (God save your soul if some government official, even a lowly mailman, has a bone to pick with you).
Ivory Coast (the country went through an Economic Miracle in the 70s and 80s, maintaining stable growth and inviting foreign experts to help optimize the production of Cocoa - with the average Westerner much richer than before, they buy even more Chocolate and Coffee. The mostly Authoritarian One Party state was softened down in the mid 80s, with the opposition Ivorian Popular Front even allowed to take control of Parliament in the January 1988 Elections and form their own Government. Conveniently, they serve as a scapegoat for the president once the prosperity runs out, and he swiftly bans them again, dissolves Parliament and rules by decree. Newly radicalized, the IPF begins a guerilla war in the countryside, now joined by tens of thousands of impoverished farmers. By 1991 the Civil War escalates, with both sides increasingly deranged - the IPF is hijacked by Pro Cameroon Communists while White Corporations increasingly become “the tail wagging the dog” for the Government. In 1995, a drought forced the IPF out of their northern positions, which proved a blessing in disguise as the flood of refugees disorganized the Government and allowed for the ‘Populars’ to enter yamoussoukro in glory. They subsequently implement land reform, which doesn't do shit as the land is already poisoned to hell and mostly useless desert, but it nets them the backing of the remaining farmers. The country remained rather isolationist, focusing on rebuilding its ruined infrastructure (to mixed results) until 2001, when they’re approached by China, asking if they’d like to sell some of their diamonds, gold, oil and natural gas. The Government accepts, and China’s faulty equipment successfully manages to destroy whatever agricultural ability they had, with the forests burning down and whatever fish remained rapidly dying. The Fish aren’t the only beings dying, though, as disease goes through the roof due to the ChiComs burning God knows what to fuel their factories. By 2007, they say thanks but no thanks and try to leave, only for the enraged Ivorians to lynch the Engineers. China doesn't retaliate at this point, and the Engis are seen as collateral damage. The country remained in poverty during the 2010s, and by 2019 they abandoned the Capital to its fate. In 2027 one of the very, very few functioning ,,countries” in Africa, but that’s a pretty generous term for a couple dozen refugee camps, slum cities, underground farms and Military bases on a tiny strip of inhabitable land, slowly hammered in by the sea, the sand and hostile foreigners. 
Liberia (During the 1970s, Liberia still begins to make ties with Non Aligned Nations and newly opened-up China, but doesn't turn its back on the USA quite as much, content to let both sides give them money for free. Both sides, wishing to be the ones in charge of ,,the African Land of Liberty” invest a lot, bringing much of the country out of poverty and slightly alleviating the differences between the rich coast and impoverished, exploited interior. Of course, corruption still eats a significant chunk of the profits, and America-Liberians still control the vast majority of political institutions. The 1980 Coup is thwarted, but provokes the True Whigs to do a bit of token reforming, allowing a weak domestic opposition to form. In the 80s, Liberia became the "Lion of Africa” with economic growth further speeding up. Mass Resource Extraction (most notably of Iron for China) makes Climate Change worse and many rivers completely dry up, but for the time being nobody cares, and token damage pay is given to farmers so that they head to the cities and work in extraction. The demand for Timber and Lumber means its forests are completely removed from the equation. After the 1988 crisis, even as the demand for their goods plummets, Iron and Wood are so universally needed that they don’t suffer quite as much. By 1990, though, their forests ran out and the river of cash went dry, prompting a coup by the newly re-impoverished natives that soon devolved into Jacobin-esque executions of the ruling classes and their collaborators. The new Government calls for an Election, which is won by the newly formed ,,Democratic Party”. The Democrats prove far less effective at combatting the crisis than their American namesakes, and soon grow quite corrupt and authoritarian - not as much as the old Whigs, but still quite a bit. In 1994 they’re couped by the Army, with various generals ruling from then until the future. When China moved into Africa in the 2000s they considered Liberia for a while, but by then it had no resources and the long route made it unattractive. Trapped between the expanding Sahara and encroaching Seas, the Liberian State further cracks down on its populace, resulting in a Civil War erupting in 2009. Much like Togo’s, it spirals out of control, and by 2011 the country is in total anarchy. Not shown on most maps by 2020, just part of a Black Blob engulfing everything between the Mediterranean and Central Africa.
Mali (Remains Isolationist and led by the Military, stuck in a limbo between the Soviets and USA (as in, constantly changing sides, as opposed to playing off both for their own benefit) and with a backwards economy, although there is some investment in light industry by the Soviets right before the Arab Israeli War. One of the poorest and most repressive states in 1980s Africa. In 1989, in light of the Austerity Measures getting even worse, and a collapse of the planned Economic Liberalization program in light of the decline in international trade, a series of uprisings shake the country, with Tuaregs rising up in the North (many fleeing further South as the desert becomes impossible to live in, even for them) and student protests flooding major cities. Those are crushed, but they reduce the Government into really an Army with a State that has very, very loose control over the countryside around its bases, and pretty much abandons the Cities to their fate. Those enclaves of control mostly drift away and crumble by 2000, especially as the Desert engulfs them and kills most of the surviving populace, with the few remaining mostly fleeing further South. Not shown on maps by 2010. 
São Tomé and Príncipe (Much like Cape Verde, it never became independent - the Socialist Rebels proved too radical for even the new Portuguese Authorities to stomach, and after a bit of fighting were crushed. Cocoa production does rise, but corruption and mismanagement mean the average Sao Toman (?) doesn't see too many improvements to his living standards. When the crash hits, it breathes new life into the Independence Movement, although that soon ends after its leader is busted for drug trafficking (or, as some claim, framed) and most of Africa’s Independent Nations begin to go to shit. Sao Tome is mostly used as a hub that provides the mainland with luxury cocoa products without the need to export them, but piracy and storms make this less and less of a profitable industry as time goes on. By 2000 Europe pretty much pulls the plug on the whole experiment, and the Islands fall into anarchy, with many plantations burning down (either due to deliberate arson or a lack of firefighting), mass shortages of drinking water and fighting between militias and gangs (with the line between the two often quite blurry). A horrific thunderstorm in 2005 destroys whatever remains of civilization, and by 2010 the Islands are uninhabited, with the locals having died out or tried to cobble together ships (or even swim) to the mainland, not really having much of a plan on what to do after they get there. Europe insists the Islands still belong to them, but mapmakers elsewhere disagree and don’t show it after 2005. 
Senegal (Remained somewhat tolerant of different lines of thought in the 60s, allowing for the formation of a Liberal and Marxist opposition. In the 1980s it transformed, with relative ease, into a proper democracy, with the opposition Senegalese Democratic Party forming a coalition with the ruling Socialist Party of Senegal and successfully pushing through some moderate reforms, easing restrictions on freedom of speech and reigning in the Police. Market Liberalization brings in plenty of investments from the West, wishing to add another member to the ,,Family of Democracies”. Thanks to agricultural exports , phosphate and fishing the country becomes one of the more well off nations in Africa. When the crash hits, the SDP and SPS blame one another and break off the coalition, resulting in the Marxists of the African Independence Party to seize power in early 1989. They get in touch with the nation’s major trade unions and try to soften the blow of the Crash, doing the usual - collectivisation, nationalization etc. By the late 90s they did grow more and more authoritarian in a bid to contain civil discontent, and even invaded Gambia in 1997 to try and pin the blame on their failures on this neighbor. They fail, and in 1999 are couped by the Trade Unions, who institute a sort of African Syndicalism. It was certainly a brave experiment, and it worked… somewhat. Living standards did decline, but the streets remained clean and somewhat safe, even if the Government had to constantly retreat further and further inward. By 2027, they control only about a third of the country’s 1960 Territory (not counting Gambia, which they fully own), but are somewhat stable and only somewhat have to open fire on food rioters. Still shown on maps, and even internationally recognized by Moscow and Beijing (until 2023, when the recognition is revoked by a Chairman’s caprice).
Sierra Leone (The country became known as a bastion of True Democracy during the 60s and 70s, with corruption pretty much not noticeable and local culture shunning politicians who abuse their office or live lavish lifestyles. Sir Albert Margai is killed in a Tram Accident on the streets of Freetown in 1963, so he never takes power and the Military is kept in check. A thriving mining sector fuels prosperity, and the Government even experiments with tourism a bit, although the country’s small size combined with the quarries and pollution make them drop that plan relatively quickly. It even becomes a hub for dissidents fleeing from the tyranny of Liberia’s True Whig Party, further fueling economic growth as they integrate expat intellectuals into their own machine of state. In the early 80s, Agriculture was modernized, meaning the country became capable of actually exporting food and not just eating it all. When the Crash happens in 1988, the Prime Minister is granted Emergency Powers but initially rules with a rather light hand, believing the crisis will soon pass on its own and not wishing to set a bad example. That said, when he sees things aren’t getting better, he coerces Parliament to vote for an extension in 1993 and becomes increasingly heavy handed, seizing produce from Farmers and establishing what amounts to a police state. But it works, and Sierra Leone remains a bastion of relative prosperity and stability throughout the Red Decade. But with an unstable budget, the PM reluctantly let in Chinese Corporations in the early 2000s, which boosts production and employment but also causes a sharp drop in crop yields. As soon as he connects the dots he begins to make the Chinese’ lives ever so slightly harder in hopes they leave, which they did in 2006. However, as he grows older, his underlings become increasingly more corrupt and authoritarian, and when he speaks up against his own Deputy’s lavish spending in 2010 he ,,mysteriously dies”, and his heirs subsequently tear the country apart in a succession crisis. After two years of War the Army manages to retake most of the country, but they rule over ashes and are unable to restore prosperity, eventually growing fat and corrupt themselves. A popular revolt in 2020 causes the collapse of Military Rule, and with it, any sort of proper statecraft in Sierra Leone. That said, it doesn't suffer from too much overpopulation, and is surprisingly still shown on most maps all the way until the Great Death.
Togo (Reforms begin quicker than OTL - Parties Re-Established in 1980, Privatization launched in late 70s as opposed to 1983. The 1986 election was actually competitive but incumbent Eyadéma was still re-elected by a wide margin. Economic Troubles became notable earlier than for most - in 1987, due to all the shit in the air, crop yields became worse, causing a crisis that made the President return to Authoritarianism (at least,temporarily”). That never stops,though, as the 1988 Crash destroys whatever is left of the Economy, a Debt Crisis destroys consumer confidence, and by 1990 Democrats begin a civil war. Communists joined as a third side in 1992, a massive refugee crisis began as people fled from Sahel as it desertified. By 2000 the Military (Eyadema died in a terrorist attack a few months prior) proclaims ,,Victory” (because everywhere outside of Lome is an uninhabitable wasteland and all the other factions are long gone), but even they get on some boats by 2009 and vanish into the Seas, leaving the locals to die. By 2010 pretty much uninhabited aside from a handful of foolish scavengers. 

Ethiopian Water Lords: 

Ethiopia (Population: 231,394,137, circa 2010)
Selassie continues to modernize Ethiopia, signing the Shanghai Accords as part of that
This results in closer ties with Europe, China and the USA
It also prevents the 1973 famine
Because of no Oil Crisis and Brezhnev being assassinated in 1969, the coup against Selassie fails and Mengistu flees to East Germany
Because of Ethiopia’s religious population and their many days of rest, the economy ends up not rising to the staggering heights as it did in other parts of the world but still does really good
In April 1977 President Morgan and Emperor Selassie sign a treaty of military modernization, with the US training and supplying the Ethiopian military 
As the economy grew, the influence of nobles, royalty and other government officials waned and bankers and large business owners became to have the most influence 
On June 29th, 1976, Haile Selassie retires and Amha becomes Emperor
Wars with Eritrea and Somalia don’t happen
Negotiations with Eritrea lead to an end of hostilities on April 4th, 1976, granting them autonomy but still a part of Ethiopia, becoming a confederacy rather than a federation
Part of these negotiations have Haile step down
Also, feudalism is abolished (though only enforced in the autonomous regions)
Ahma Selassie ends up being a puppet for the rich 
Throughout the 1980s Ethiopia does pretty alright, with the major famine in the 1980s being avoided through trade deals with Somalia
In 1988, Ethiopia’s economy completely crashes, with the business elites fleeing to Europe and the monarchy being ousted in a soviet-sponsored revolution 
This new government remains a tenuous hold on the population with extreme force and strict curfews
Eritrea and Tigray try to leave and declare independence, and the new Revolutionary government attacks them. Ogaden also tries to leave, but due to it being the main bread basket in Ethiopia, they hold on to it for dear life
Religion is outlawed in an attempt to make a secular government
The Hot Summer of 1990 causes widespread famine and rationing
The military only maintains order because of the US military weapons given to them in the 1970s
When Somalia invades, Ethiopia repels them, and causes Somalia to fall into civil war (1990)
The revolutionary council of Ethiopia invades Djibouti in 1991
Soviets cut off aid in 1994
Anti-government militia movements grow during the 1990s, turning into a protracted civil war in 1995. 
Nation-wide martial law is declared in 1996, and the flood of refugees in the late 1990s cause border fortifications to be built
In the 2000s, due to the rise of religious cults, the government cracks down even harder against opposition. Hunger strikes become common but die out due their ineffectiveness. Criminals are sent to work in concentration camps or are used as target practice for the army 
When China comes along, they help set up mining operations and metal refineries. 
In 2008 though it becomes apparent that these have heavily damaged the water tables and soil of Ethiopia, and leads to famine after famine
The civil war picks up again in 2011, with it devolving into feudalism in 2015
In 2016, some warlords send out traders to scout for water and negotiate with their leaders. Contact is made with the Victorious Queen, and a famine is averted 
Rwanda, Burundi, and parts of Tanzania and the Congo join
In 2017 the warlords battle each other until only one remains, and he declares himself the Emperor of Ethiopia
In 2018 Sudan becomes a serf of Ethiopia, and trade routes are established with ruins of Chad, who also joins the confederacy
In 2019 remnants of the CAR and Zaire join as serfs of the Lord of the Congo
In 2021 remnants of the Republic of the Congo join the Confederacy as serfs of Chad
Ethiopian Water Lords: 
King of Lake Chad (Chad)
Chieftain of Lake Lagdo (Cameroon)
Lord of the Congo (Congo) 
The Victorious Queen (Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda, and Kenya) 
The Emperor of Tana (Ethiopia)
Sudan (Population: 47,251,917, circa 1990)
Sudan signs the Shanghai accords 
Relations between Sudan and the USSR break down following their signing of the Shanghai Accords
Internationally mediated negotiations, following a similar plan compared to Ethiopia and makes Sudan and South Sudan a confederacy
The US makes a similar treaty to the one they made with Ethiopia in 1977
However in the mid 1980s, the more Islamic leaning southern Sudan begins to side with Egypt and become anti-US, furthering ties with the Middle East
Boycotts against western and eastern goods in 1987 and 1988 lead to a civil war in March 1988, with al-Bashir leading a coalition that took over the government by April that year
Sudan joins the Sinai War 
In June 1988, an israeli nuke tries to target Khartoum but is shot down in the Red Sea, causing a mass die-off of fish there
Widespread famine and heatwaves, plus wildfires, cause Sudan to collapse into civil war in 1989. Refugees flee to South Sudan, while pro-Arab islamists migrate to Egypt, causing a demographic shift. 
In the Hot Summer of 1990, ethnic conflict cause tribes to declare war on each other over dwindling resources
Chad briefly takes over parts of Sudan in the 1990s
In the 2000s, China arrives and tries to extract as much oil as possible but constant warring between ethnic tribes and religious extremists cause China to pull out by 2002. 
In the mid 2000s, some tribes use leftover chinese equipment to mine precious minerals, and some of them sell them at high prices to the EF and the soviet union, though by 2011 this is no longer profitable 
Large amounts of arable land and careful allocation of water cause the Sudanese to survive the great heatwave of 2015 and actually end up trading with Ethiopia 
Allainces between Sudanese warlords and Ethiopian traders lead to safer trade routes and supply lines being established, though the encroaching sahara has forced many to work at night after 2017
Sandstorms and drought in the early 2020s cause Sudan to be isolated and cut off from supply lines, leading to civil war and famine with reports of rampant cannibalism 
The Ethiopians lead a military expedition into Sudan in late 2024 and reestablish order
By 2027, while relatively fertile and having many natural resources, the Ethiopians lack the equipment to get them and the wilderness outside the main trade corridor is plagued with bandits, cannibals and warlords
Uganda (Population: 56,016,528, Circa 2010)
Aligned more with the USSR than China
Amin rules over the country much like OTL, however east germany is not as involved 
The deportation of Asians cause tensions with China to fray, leading to embargos against Uganda
The economy collapses much like in OTL
Amin’s secret police and overall intelligence services are much less competent due to the lack of East German support
The Tanzian-Ugandan war is much shorter in this timeline (ending in January 1979), with Amin caught completely by surprise
China works with Tanzania and the UN to create a provisional government for Uganda that is more conducive to the free market
This new government is more authoritarian though, and China places Asians in positions of power
A massacre of Christian missionaries in 1982 causes a Christian insurgency but it remains very weak
After the crash of 1988, China tries to rig the election but it spirals out into a civil war 
By the Hot Summer of 1990, it is feudalism 
In 1992, a christian warlord begins uniting the country on a policy of “Anti-Eastern Imperialism”
This leads to the invasion of Kenya when chronic droughts affect their food supplies
This causes Uganda to collapse yet again and devolve into anarchy 
In the 2000s, China seeks out the survivors of the Anti-Asian purge and puts them in positions of power and uses them to prop up a rudimentary government so that they can extract Ugandan natural gas and oil
Uganda’s oil proves to be too costly to access but the natural gas flows all the way to 2007
The “Socialist Republic of Uganda” lasts from 2000-2015 before falling to the Victorious Queen
The Queen uses leftover Chinese equipment to engage in extensive mining operations, though is careful to not let it affect any lakes 
In the 2020s, the Queen maintains a tight grip over Uganda through all the famine, disease, drought and desertification
By 2027, Uganda is the site of the largest remaining industrial center in the Ethiopian Confederacy 
Kenya (Population: 64,441,089, circa 2010)
Signs the Shanghai Accords in 1972
The US invests heavily in the 1970s, with Morgan praising the concept of “Black Capitalism” 
Kenya remains very corrupt in the Glorious Decades
The reversal of rural-to-urban migration is successful and Kenya sees a large increase to their agricultural sector
Kenya remains closely aligned with the UK in the Glorious Decades
Succession movements in the region bordering Somalia die down to the economic upheaval
In the 1980s, Kenya remains extremely agrarian, with factories rarely being built
In the early 1980s, Morgan pressures Kenya to become more democratic
Moi wins the 1984 election 
Moi uses his executive power to put members of his ethnic tribe in positions of wealth and power, leading to further corruption
After the crash of 1988, Kenya isn’t that badly affected, only the people in power see a dramatic decline in their living standards and thus leads to a coup in 1989
The Hot Summer of 1990 and the resulting drought causes a socialist revolution that is supported by the USSR
Lake Victoria is used for irrigation and Kenya begins exporting surplus crops to neighboring nations
An invasion from Uganda in 1995 lead to the state heavily militarizing their borders and no longer supporting free trade 
China ignores them in the 2000s, though disputes with neighboring nations about the use of Lake Victoria cause conflict 
The African Water War of 2006 kicks off with Kenya taking over all of Lake Victoria and battling Chinese-supported Tanzania for control
The war ends in 2010 with Tanzania collapsing into civil war 
However, the war was devastating to Kenya’s farms and in the summer of 2011, it all comes crashing down into another civil war
It evens out into warlordism by the Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016. A former concubine turned raider declares herself the “Queen of Lake Victoria” and makes deals with the Ethiopians to use the lake for irrigation, staving off a famine 
The Victorious Queen takes over much of the land surrounding Lake Victoria, including parts of Rwanda, Burundi, Zaire, and Uganda 
The fiefdom controlled by the Victorious Queen ends up being the main breadbasket for much of Central Africa, though Ethiopia maintains more stable and reliable harvests 
In the late 2010s and early 2020s, agents from the GAR try to launch rebellions in the Queen’s fiefdom. Burundi becomes the site of a massive “naval” battle between the GAR slave soldiers and the queen’s forces 
By the Great Heatwave of 2023 and 2024, much of Burundi and Tanzania have fallen to rebellion, famine and warlordism, becoming more aligned with the GAR by the day and controlled by bloodthirsty warlords 
Famines in the aftermath of the Great Heatwaves of 2023 and 2024 cause soldiers to regularly engage in cannibalism with fallen GAR slave soldiers 
By 2027, the Victorious Queen might not be Victorious any longer as chronic famines and wildfires cause crippling crop failures
Chad (Population: 20,451,868, Circa 2010)
During the Civil War, the French leave in 1971 and do not train the soldiers
The reforms proposed by the French up being a lot more successful 
Tombalbaye, being pragmatic, signs the Shanghai Accords in exchange for help fighting the rebels in FROLINAT
China begins helping in 1974
The rebels are wiped out in 1975
In 1977, Morgan begins pressuring him to democratize 
Free elections are held in 1978, with a french-sympathetic politician dominating the scene until 1992
In the 1980s, because of Iranian oil, Chad’s petroleum industry isnt that well developed and Chad remains mainly agrarian 
In the 1980s, Chad is used for PR purposes to make politicians and business men look good “Oh we’re donating 1 billion dollars to Chad to help fund their infrastructure!” or “I spent the summer of 1985 in Chad building affordable housing!” 
Chad’s close ties to Europe lead to it remaining neutral in the Sinai War
After the crash of 1988 though, the newly elected pro-european president makes a deal with Europe to help extract its petroleum in exchange for food support 
France is initially hesitant (due to the new communist president) but relents when the transportation breakdown affects the economy 
In 1990 after the Hot Summer Europe stops sending food and instead just launches a coup to facilitate taking the oil
This leads to a war in 1991, with Europe finally kicked out in 1992, right before the Brussels conference 
This new chad is extremely anti-European and uses the captured European equipment to launch wars into various neighboring states such as Sudan and CAR, causing Niger and Nigeria to both militarize in response 
Using the exploited food from its conquered territories, Chad narrowly avoids civil war and famine before collapsing again in 1998
In the 2000s, China props up the warlord controlling the oil fields and helps him conquer much of the habitable zones of Chad
China defends Chadian resources heavily but rebellion and sabotage cause all of the oil to become unusable or unreachable by 2003
The dictator uses the chinese and european equipment to launch a new reign of terror against the populace, ending in the Summer of 2011
As a result of chinese equipment and drought, much of the agriculture dies and shrivels up. Only a few towns remain by Lake Chad. Nomads from Niger frequently raid the farms, leading to feudalism 
In the aftermath of the Great Heatwave of 2015 and 2016, the “King of Lake Chad” joins the Ethiopan confederacy in exchange for weapons and food. He officially joins in 2018
In the 2020s, the N'Djamena-Addis Ababa corridor is one of the main trade routes in the Ethiopian Confederacy, and actually relatively safe as it is frequently patrolled by militias 
Sandstorms and drought during the Great Heatwave of 2023 and 2024 cause contact to momentarily be lost but its reestablished in 2025
As of 2027, the outpost on Lake Chad is a major trading hub for the Ethiopian Water Lords, with the King of Chad one of said lords. However, the ever-encroaching desert might put a stop to that… 
Republic of the Congo (Population: 7,253,291, Circa 2010)
Aligned with the USSR in the 1970s under Marien Ngouabi
Throughout the 1970s, France tries to woo the People’s Republic of the Congo to join the Shanghai Accords
The coup in 1977 and 1979 continue as OTL, but with Nguesso, he finally signs the Shanghai Accords and allows Chinese and Western investors in
In 1982 it transitions to a western-style democracy with elections held in 1984. 
A military revolt in 1987 causes the government to temporarily enact martial law
After the crash of 1988, the economy briefly rose with an oil spike
However in 1989, Nguesso doesn’t get reelected and instead a hardcore communist comes into power
He enacts a self coup and establishes a dictatorship 
But the Hot Summer of 1990 causes a civil war
This civil war continues into a stalemate, with much of the ROC falling into anarchy and the few areas with resources being controlled by warlords
In the 2000s China tries to help modernize it and get some cash by extracting minerals, this brings stability to the region briefly under a Chinese-sympathetic communist warlord
Once the chinese support dries up, it plunges again into civil war between pro-chinese bureaucrats and nationalists lead by an Aka
In the 2010s, pirates dominate the coast and human traffickers kidnap villagers. 
In the summer of 2011, flooding destroys vast amounts of crops, leading to cases of cannibalism
In the Great Heatwaves of 2015-2016, water shortages, flooding and water pollution cause almost a million deaths
In the 2020s, alliances between warlords in Likouala lead to them joining the Ethiopian Confederacy
In 2022, a warlord from Brazzaville tries to retake Likouala but gives up during the Second Great Heatwave
As of 2027, the region of Likouala is under attack by militants, with the Ethiopian water lords offering their support to defend the region as it is a key part of their supply lines 
Rwanda (Population: 25,215,070, Circa 1990)
In 1973, Juvénal Habyarimana takes power like in OTL
Rwanda signs the Shanghai Accords later that year
In 1975 the National Revolutionary Movement for Development is more successful at unifying the Tutsi and the Hutu but is terrified of the Hutus genociding them like they did in Burundi
Because Rwanda has little natural resources, and its economy is solely based on agriculture, most of the world turns a blind eye towards Rwanda becoming a totalitarian state
In the late 1970s, Rwanda becomes deeply paranoid and anti-socialist, calling it a cancer
In fact, in the 80s, China helps establish penal factories to utilize the Hutus as slave labor
In 1988, after the crash, the Hutus launch a civil war against Tutsi government that quickly spills over into Burundi
The Hutu government takes over Burundi and creates a socialist ethnostate that is at first supported by the USSR before even THEY are like “bro wtf” 
In the Hot Summer of 1990, groups from Uganda invade the Hutu Ethnostate causing a long, drawn out war that causes Rwanda to collapse
For the rest of the 1990s, Rwanda is an increasingly fractured alliance of hutu warlords
In the 2000s, famine causes severe depopulation and the remaining functional farms to be based around Lake Kivu
By 2011, a single war lord controls Lake Kivu
In the 2010s, the Great Heatwaves cause mass vegetation die off with reports of cannibalism. This causes lake Kivu to have an excess build up of CO2
In the 2020s, Ethiopians take over the remnants of Lake Kivu and auction out the water for irrigation
In 2022, a massive cloud of CO2 erupts from Lake Kivu, killing an estimated 3.4 million people 
By 2027, the Ethiopian Water Lords carefully irrigate out the remnants of Lake Kivu
Burundi (Population: 23,443,899, Circa 1990)
Became aligned with China
In 1972, Chen helps Burundi carry out their genocide on Hutus
The majority-Tutsi government became a police ethnostate, but remained quite socialist. If you were a Tutsi, you had access to job security, healthcare, large houses, ect
In the 1980s, Burundi became a flipped version of Rwanda, but hardcore socialists
After the crash of 1988, the Tutsi government of Rwanda flees to Burundi but then the civil war spills over, with the indentured Hutus rising up 
After the Hot Summer of 1990, Zaire claims all of Lake Tanganyika as its territory and this causes the Hutu ethnostate to fracture
In the 1990s the remnants of the Tutsi and the Hutus, after seeing how their countries were basically the same, make peace and create a small confederacy in Makamba
In the 2000s famine, drought, and desertification cause mass depopulation except for in Makamba
In 2011, Makamba is absorbed by one of the factions of the Tanzanian civil war
In 2014, spillover from the civil war finally wipes out the last of the native Burundis
After the Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016 it is absorbed into the Victorious Queen’s domain
In the 2020s, Burundi is the site of a massive battle between the Ethiopian Confederacy and the GAR
By 2027, part of Lake Tanganyika is taken over by the Water Lords, but other than that, Burundi has ceased to exist
Tanzania (Population: 79,264,115, Circa 2000)
Mostly goes as OTL at first, with ties to the People’s Republic of China and a rather large amount of Authoritarianism. The ruling ideology of ,,African Socialism”, which emphasized the Rural Countryside as good and urban areas as ,,inherently bourgeoisie”, ironically means the environment remains in decent shape (aside from endangered animals, which are often hunted by corrupt officials for sport). 
Speaking of corruption, Tanzania becomes one of the most corrupt nations in Africa, with the rapid rise in prosperity making that even a steeper turn. That said, essential commodities mostly remain available until 1988, when the country’s imports begin to dry up due to a rapid rise in prices of pretty much everything. 
The country was rocked by protests in 1990, which resulted in a series of massacres and resulted in the ruling Revolution Party further clamping down on discontent and turning from “soft” authoritarianism towards open despotism. Now seeing the writing on the wall, Tanzania turns into a de facto command economy, which goes about as well as you’d expect with the rampant corruption. 
By 2000 much of the countryside has been stripped bare of anything by hordes of starving urbanites (sometimes openly encouraged to move to the country by clueless officials, who thought that a band of men and women who’d never stepped foot outside a City would make good farmers), and as such in 2001 another famine hits, with a Popular Revolt just barely contained by the Military Remnants a year later. 
Thankfully, this is about the time China begins to fully invest in Africa, and while Tanzania does have some resources, it lacks the means to extract them all. Until now. Of course, the Chinese Equipment is horribly faulty and inefficient, and the additional corruption means that very little of this wealth ever reaches the shores of the Land of the Tiger. 
While for a time Tanzania remains in the top ten fastest growing economy, before long officials in Beijing begin to see the whole thing as a waste of finite resources and pull the plug even before the 2007 Indian Sea incident. 
As a result, the economy pretty much collapsed, with massive blackouts completely stopping any sort of industry and thousands taking to the streets to riot. While the Capital was successfully stormed and the President strung up on a lamppost, nobody could agree on what the next Government should be like, resulting in a chaotic ,,Civil War” with constantly changing sides, with things becoming more convoluted than Holy Roman Politics - to the point no comprehensive report on it had been filed until the Great Death. Most of the Warlords were uninteresting, the usual war criminal bandits trying to suck the land dry of anything of use, mostly utilizing ancient Chinese equipment manned by slaves in all but name. 
After the great heatwave of 2015, the Victorious Queen takes over much of north tanzania
Tanzania remains extremely chaotic in the 2020s with the victorious Queen losing much of her influence
Some maps still showed it by 2010, even as the GAR and Ethiopian Water Lords began to encroach, but by 2020 they all gave up - another state lost to the black blob slowly engulfing the Darkest Continent.
Central African Republic (Population: 7,581,418, Circa 1990)
Relations between Bokassa’s empire and France remain tenuous - with advances in medical science, Charles de Gaulle lives longer and remains the President for longer. He is known for frequently shit talking Bokassa in the 1970s
China, trying to get close ties to them, bankrolls the coronation in exchange for diamonds
Bokassa is overthrown by a coalition of French, Chinese and American soldiers in 1977
President Morgan works closely with the UN and France to create a democracy that is conducive to the Free Market
Dacko’s reforms in 1979 are more successful, and he avoids a coup
In the 1980s, CAR becomes closely aligned with China, and used many of their diamonds and gold to make jewerly in the Glorious Decades 
After the crash of 1988, Dacko is overthrown in a coup in late 1988
The last forests are completely cut down by 1989
This new government rules with a harsh authoritarian grip until it is toppled in a civil war provoked by the Hot Summer of 1990
Famines are avoided but droughts continue to worsen in the 1990s
Chad takes them over in the late 1990s
China arrives in the 2000s and helps the CAR dictator regain territory and revitalize their economy. Oil is extracted, along with Uranium
This causes several nearby nations to invade the CAR and in 2004 China pulls out as they believe it is no longer worth it
Reportedly, the Soviets tried to make some deals to get their uranium but nothing came of it
By 2005, it has descended into a fascist dictatorship who routinely imprison their opponents and work them to death
In the 2010s, famines and overexploitation of the environment led to cannibalism 
In the Great Heat Wave of 2015, the government finally collapses and a civil war breaks out
In the 2020s, the Ethiopians make overtures to the remnants of the CAR and some of them join the confederacy, with several outposts in the northern plains and along the rivers
By 2027, much of the CAR is in anarchy, as the few outposts for water are no longer feasible or profitable
Zaire (Population: 223,943,111, Circa 2000)
Seko becomes dictator as in OTL
In 1972, under pressure from the West, Zaire begins to democratize, with free elections being held in 1977, though Seko remains as “executive commissioner”, which retains a large amount of power
Zaire is quite resistant to forming ties with Rwanda and Burundi
Zaire remains just as corrupt though, and it is an unspoken rule to always overpay Zairens 
China remains a close ally throughout the 1980s
Zaire’s main export is precious metals 
After the crash of 1988, the economy crumbles and Seko is killed in a coup
This new government is highly unstable
Spill over from Rwanda and Burundi lead to martial law and routine “kill squads” 
Many are forced into working anyway, as this new dictator believes he can get away with anything
In the Hot Summer of 1990, drought causes Zaire to take over Lake Tanganyika
In the 1990s, genocide and state-sponsored terrorism keep the country running
Famine is not an issue in the 1990s because so many people are killed 
Zaire is one of the first countries China invested in, with the government being propped up by them all the way back in 1999
Zaire becomes heavily industrialized in the 2000s 
When China leaves, GAR-associated sleeper agents destabilize the government and cause a civil war in 2008
The civil war collapses into anarchy and warlordism by 2011
Some of these warlords are puppets of the EF, US and USSR and siphon resources back to their native countries
The Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016 cause the rest of the population to concentrate around the Congo river in the west and Lake Tanganyika in the east and the puppet states to collapse 
Apocalyptic cults of all three main abrahamic faiths become prominent in the aftermath of the Great Heat Waves, and much of central Zaire becomes a battle royale with tons of cannibalism and tribalism 
In the midst of this, the GAR starts to send “resource extraction squads” to get precious minerals and more importantly, water
In the 2020s, Ethiopian water lords arrive in the region and start to battle the GAR and cults for access to the water
The Great Heatwaves of 2023 and 2024 cause the GAR to retreat
By 2027, Ethiopia has numerous outposts in the northern sections of the country while the GAR controls the southern edges. The religious battle royale is still on going, with the Christians winning 
Cameroon (Population: 30,553,438, Circa 2010)
President Ahmadou Ahidjo died after choking on some steak in early 1962, allowing for the Union of the Peoples of Cameroon, a radical Marxist Movement which decried his moderate Pro French Stance, to take power, although clashes continued until 1965 between them and remnants of the old regime. 
The new Government holds “elections”, where the only observers are from Albania and in which UPC Candidates win all 200 Seats for the Legislature. The newly chosen Chairman, a former Partizan Leader and public fan of Hoxha’s works of Literature, gets to work, quickly making himself known as a ,,"Rabid Reformer”, dismantling old social structures at gunpoint and enforcing women’s liberation. Those who disagree are swiftly purged, and a Political Police is set up to aid in the process. Cameroon mostly stays in China’s sphere, even ditching Albania for its Billion Man Friend after Chen and Enver have a public falling out over the former’s capitalist tendencies. 
In the 1980s, Cameroon did reform somewhat, even dropping the ,,People’s” from their name and becoming known simply as the ,,Republic of Cameroon”. The UCP even allows for an opposition to contest the 1987 Elections, in which they win a whopping three seats. Out of 200, mind you. That said, they remain a rather agrarian and backward state, with the production of oil mostly for domestic purposes (aside from a bit sold off to China for a rather low price - you know, friendship and all that). 
As the Red Decade begins, nothing much initially changes in Cameroon, with the bloated Military and Political Police keeping the borders stable and the populace squashed even as restrictions on movement and rationing get tighter with each day. 
That said, in the mid 90s, they opened up to Chinese Investment full time, and before long their countryside was littered with quarries extracting bauxite and iron to feed the Chenist Giant’s insatiable appetite. 
Their timber industry ceased to exist by 1997 due to, you know, the obvious, and the expansion of their Oil and Gas sectors was stifled by both distance and the shoddy nature of Chinese Engineering, but they managed to actually grow somewhat, soon becoming the poster child of Chinese Friendship, inspiring other states across the continent to open up and let Big Brother Chen build up his facilities. 
However, after the long running Chairman dies in 2001, his replacement proves less keen on having ,,Foreign Imperialists’ in his country, and thus, while he doesn't publicly boot out the Chinese, he stops being constantly slavish to them, which they don’t appreciate. 
As such, they have him killed and replaced with a puppet, which inspires his supporters to begin a rural insurgency, blowing up Chinese Power Plants and sabotaging Industry. These few grains of sand are enough to make Cameroon’s Economy come to a grinding halt, and only an indiscriminate campaign using chemical weapons and mass bombing with ancient artillery manages to somewhat stabilize the frontlines, pushing out the Partizans (and thousands of innocent civilians lost in the crossfire) into neighboring nations to be someone else’s problem. 
By 2005, China pretty much stopped investing altogether, and by 2007 they cash in their chips and leave. 
As such, the Partizans return with tripe the strength, and a very nasty Civil War ensues - neither side is strong enough to dislodge the other, so the ,,Chenists” and the ,,Maoists” exchange the titles of ,,Very Weak central Government” and ,,Very Strong Remnant Regime” until 2017, when the easily available resources run out and a total collapse of modern society ensues.  
By 2020, not shown on most maps, although isolated settlements do exist, mostly huddled around either Chinese Power Plants whose energy they rent out to warlords in exchange for food or the three functioning plantations that haven’t withered away into dust yet (although their number keeps dropping due to raiding, climate change and, from one point onward, mass group suicides when it becomes clear Tomorrow will not get any better).
In the 2020s, massive limnic eruptions keep the Ethiopians from expanding to the coast
Nigeria (Population: 334,914,685, Circa 2010)
After the 1965 coup, the country underwent a very brutal modernization period, with farmers forced to work on Oil Extraction and Infrastructure works. Prosperity does increase somewhat, but it doesn't really impact the lives of average citizens - the newly erected districts of cities remain glorified slums, and the countryside is in utter poverty, with occasional sectional violence a mere cherry on top. 
After some gentle pressure from the USA, and even domestic oligarchs, the Military Regime stepped aside in favour of a Civilian Ruled and generally Democratic Second Republic in 1979. The country is far from perfect, but repressions against the rural populace are lessened and a token amount of money is even invested into keeping agriculture around, even if most of the country’s food is imported by that point. 
Large investments are made into education and healthcare to accommodate for the growing population (rising to over 100 Million by 1985), even if corruption eats into those efforts and makes them less than efficient. Democracy remains shaky, and has to fight off a coup attempt in 1985, but does survive the Glorious Decades, and most economists claim that a Second Decade of relative prosperity is all that’s needed to entrench a proper representative system and drastically decrease the chances of a successful coup. 
However, the country wouldn’t get that much time, as the Crash happened in 1988 and subsequently things go to shit in a heartbeat. With the collapse of global trade, and agriculture gutted both by Government Policy and climate change, starvation becomes a real issue. Fires devastate the slums, the North falls into sectarian violence between Christians and Muslims, several gangs begin to openly operate in urban areas and even prove more efficient or, ironically, fairer than elected authorities. 
This is too much to handle for the Army - the President is executed and Parliament dissolved in mid 1989, with a ,,Transitional Regime” taking its place. Millions of urbanites are hastily sent back to the country to ,,farm”, in spite of the fact the majority of them have no experience living outside the cities, and the few former farmers don’t do too well due to the constant droughts and lack of modern equipment. 
Thankfully, China soon shows up, and in exchange for the Junta legalizing the nonexistent Nigerian Communist Party it begins to set up shop. Of course, the workplace accidents only make living in the cities more hazardous, and whatever little mineral value the soil has is absolutely decimated by the Power Plant Pollution, but what else is there to do? As such, Nigeria just barely manages to crawl its way through the Red Decade, and actually sees some positive improvements in the early 2000s, with the Regime trying to crack down on corruption and improve living standards (not out of the goodness of their hearts, but so that the Plebeians don’t eat them, as already happened in many neighboring states). 
And then the Chinese pull out, and a lack of engineers means most of that progress is undone, or will be by 2010 when shit breaks and there’s nobody to fix it, and nothing to replace it with anyway. 
In 2009 the Junta faced dozens of uprisings from all sorts of groups - ethnic militias, mercenaries, religious fundamentalists, rebelling police units, democratic oppositionists, hardened communist militants and so on. 
By 2011 the Civil War is over, and all the Warlords go their own ways, having little will or ability to wage further warfare. To their credit, most form functional states, ones that work above the level of primitive bandit fiefs, and the People’s Republic of Biafra even hosts one of the continent’s last working Chinese-Built Power Plants up until 2025, and even then has plans to get it back online by 2028. 
Some Northern Breakways do fall to Climate Change (and the subsequent droughts, refugee waves and crumbling agriculture), with the Water Lords slowly encroaching on the Eastern Provinces (although most of their offensives are repelled by the locals’ joint efforts). 
Not shown on maps by 2015, although some do bother to try and track down where the borders between breakways lie at that point. 
Niger (Population: 37,423,145, circa 1990)
One Party Civilian Dictatorship during the 60s and much of the 70s. 
Benefits from an Uranium Boom, but it ends prematurely and the Government ends up overthrown by the Military. 
There is Secret Police and Media Censorship, but the economy remains sluggish, with corruption rampant and poverty everpresent. 
Some media groups claim that Niger was Africa’s poorest state in 1988, and while that cannot be confirmed it’s more likely than not. 
After the Crisis international aid dries up and a Popular Revolt routs the Military in 1989, resulting in the proclamation of a ,,Second Republic” - one that immediately faces a Tuareg revolt and electoral violence, causing one of the candidates (a populist, placed third by the few polls held at the time, trailing behind a far more popular Socialist Oppositionist and Pro Moscow Communist) to gather his supporters and stage a coup. 
They form a kleptocracy little better than the one before it, and completely fail to address the country’s issues. 
The desertification and massive storms result in Niger ceasing to exist by 2000, although some groups of nomads remain
by 2020 the Water Lords have a few outposts in what used to be the country’s Eastern Periphery. Not shown on maps by 2005.

GAR: 

Namibia (Population: 4,133,512, circa 2020)
Namibia remains a part of South Africa ITTL, though is granted autonomy during the Glorious Decades to appease the UN
In the 1980s, South African control of Namibia is a frequent talking point in the Non-Aligned movement
Rebel movements constantly spring up, sometimes spilling over into South Africa
In 1989, South Africa formally takes over Namibia, citing internal security issues 
In 1990, martial law is declared and South Africa begins building camps to house natives while they pacify the region
Most of Namibia remains a desert, but throughout the 1990s mining operations are set up by South Africa
Namibia is kept on a tight leash, with famines and drought constantly plaguing the population
Food begins to be carefully rationed out for the “workers” until the summer of 2003 when they switch to stew
By 2011, all the farms in Namibia have withered away and the white soldiers have to get their food imported 
By 2016, even the whites are experiencing drought, leading to internal conflict in the GAR about allocation of water
By 2023, the a mega-drought causes almost 60% of the population to die 
The Solar Storm of 2026 causes a massive wildfire to burn down over half of the remaining settlements 
As of 2027, the GAR is considering leaving Namibia - already, the northernmost settlements are being evacuated while they slowly retreat into Angola or parts of Botswana
Botswana (Population: 1,248,598, circa 2020)
Botswana signs the Shanghai Accords
The Tribal Grazing Act of 1975 is more successful 
Botswana makes deals with China for mining
Botswana becomes super rich, and industrializes very fast
Botswana also invests in education, causing a dramatic rise in literacy 
Botswana works to become less connected to South Africa, which they dont like 
In the Glorious Decades, the government of Botswana prioritizes “modernization” instead of mediating ethnic and tribal conflicts
Botswana signs a peace deal in 1977 with both the US and China to help modernize their military against the rise of white-lead governments in neighboring nations 
When Rhodesia attempts to invade Botswana in 1977, they are beaten back by the well-equipped Botswana forces 
Livestock farming becomes less important, with a growing vegetarianism movement in the 1980s
In the 1980s, the administration maintains a policy of having the president and vice president being from different regions so that they work together 
Drought avoided in the 1980s due to negotiations with other nations
In the 1980s, South Africa tries to recapture “Xhosan Rebels” hiding in Botswana, leading to a heavily militarized border 
When the Crash of 1988 comes around, the diamonds are practically worthless and drought quickly becomes a prominent issue
Trade unions force the mines to stay open and mine coal, and local government officials begin to prioritize the dwindling water supply to help focus on their local tribe
The Hot Summer of 1990 puts Botswana to the test, as while they never run out of energy, drought and poverty become extremely rampant
Martial law is declared and South African spies begin fermenting civil unrest in 1991 
A major riot in 1992 finally culminates into a twelve-way civil war, with it basically being a free-for-all between the tribes and the central government
Some tribes take weapons generously “donated” to them by South Africa, causing the violence to escalate significantly
The civil war ends in 1996 as a south-african backed Kalangan warlord takes over much of Botswana 
Botswana is annexed by South Africa in 1997, with the warlord executed on the capitol 
In the 2000s, the GAR forces Botswanans to work in the mines which suffer from a high mortality rate
Some tribes resist of course, leading to a protracted guerilla war in Botswana from 1998-2011. The tribes that resist are led by the Tlôkwa people 
The Red Summer of 2003 causes the GAR to prioritize the harvests for the whites in South Africa, leading to the “stew cannibalism” 
Many of the resisting tribes die out, with the Kwena being the last ones to survive before being wiped out by GAR forces in the summer of 2011
Between 2011 and 2014 the GAR beings building lavish summer homes in the northern countryside
Revolts and rebellions in the Great Heat Waves of 2015 and 2016 cause many of these homes to burn down, and Botswana becomes a tightly controlled police state, worked to the bone by the boers 
Between 2017 and 2023, the GAR works Botswanans to the death by forcing them to dismantle industrial parks made in the 1970s and 1980s
By the 2020s, there are no farms in Botswana, with the last remaining water sources used for irrigating South African crops. The mines are still active though. 
Botswana barely survives the Second Great Heat Wave of 2023 and 2024, with a mega-drought causing all the remaining water to dry up, leading to millions of deaths 
In 2024 and 2025, equipment starts breaking down at such a rate that mining by pickaxe is no longer efficient, causing many mines to close down and workers to be killed
In the Solar Storm of 2026, the remaining electrical infrastructure is completely fried, and a huge wildfire damages the remaining flammable structures 
As of 2027, Botswana is a crisp wasteland, though it still retains a large amount of untapped minerals
Zimbabwe (Population: 28,184,198, circa 2020)
The Rhodiasian Bush War is far less chaotic in this timeline, with negotiations starting in 1972
Between 1972-1976, many whites leave for South Africa
Gains independence in 1976, after the Vietnam War ends
Zimbabwe signs the Shanghai Accords this year
Zimbabwe imports a lot of energy 
Many schools and hospitals are built in the 1980s
It becomes truly democratic in 1983, as Morgan pressures them to have universal suffrage
South Africa stokes racial tension between the white minority members of the government and the elected blacks, notably in the armed forces
This creates political polarization between the “reconciliation” faction (who wanted everyone to live peacefully) and the “justice” faction led by Nkomo
Farming is owned by more blacks in this timeline
But blacks still own the majority of mines
China helps build many refineries in the late 1980s in exchange for better prices on metals
Access to clean water is also an issue persisting throughout the Glorious Decades due to pollution of rivers
Sanitation issues cause a huge cholera outbreak in 1987
When the Crash of 1988 hits, access to clean water and additional energy plummets
This finally flares up into a civil war in 1989, with South Africa invading to “maintain the peace” between white minorities and African nationalists 
Many that fled to South Africa in the 1970s and 1980s return to help run this new government
In the Hot Summer of 1990, “New Rhodesia” blames their economic problems on the blacks and institute apartheid
“New Rhodesia” Official becomes a part of South Africa in 1991
In the 1990s, plantations and summer houses are set up for the white minority while the africans are strictly segregated 
Some minor rebellions happen in the late 1990s, but nothing on the scale of Botswana
Clean water is prioritized for the whites while polluted water is used for irrigating food for the “lesser races” 
But by 2003, this becomes unfeasible, and instead water starts to become prioritized for loyal whites and cannibalism becomes used like how it is in Botswana
Due to Rhodesia’s relatively habitable climate, major farms are established here using water from Mozambique 
The summer of 2011 forces the GAR to rethink land allocation, and begins scaling back their mining efforts in Rhodesia to instead use it for farming
Between 2011 and 2014, Rhodesia is the main summer home for the white elites
During the Great Heat Waves, pipelines from Mozambique are damaged by rebels and this launches the South African Water Wars
From 2015-2018, the GAR engages in a campaign of ruthless genocide in Zambia, Malawi and Mozambique, with many soldiers coming from Rhodesia
The status quo continues until 2023, when several white outposts in Angola and Namibia demand more water, almost causing a civil war. This forces the GAR to expand ever further into Tanzania and into the sphere of the Ethiopian Confederacy 
During the solar flare of 2026, many of the farms catch on fire, and for the first time the Groot Leader is forced to reduce rations for the white minority 
As of 2027, Rhodesia is barely hanging on, as fears of civil war has led to the gradual demilitarization of Rhodesia
Mozambique (Population: 45,101,577, circa 2020)
Mozambique becomes independent in 1973 due to mediations by the USA and China
They sign the Shanghai Accords in 1973
The Portuguese were granted safe passage to Portugal, becoming an extremely small minority by 1973
China helps guide Mozambique into a beacon of “African Socialism”, with a one-party authoritarian dictatorship ruling in “the name of the people and workers” 
The government remains quite authoritarian during the Glorious Decades, however they open up trade with the outside world much like China
Businesses were nationalized and then sold out to foreign investors, and the media was state controlled
In the 1970s, Machel was quite paranoid about pop culture infiltrating Mozambique and thus heavily policed against “western cultural imperialism” until mellowing out in the 1980s
Mozambique created a “party loyalty sliding scale”, which judged citizens based on how loyal they were to Machel. If they were deemed deviants, they were sent to concentration camps (in the 1970s) and work factories (in the 1980s) 
Martial law is declared in 1979, with a low-intensity civil war between Machel’s communist faction and anti-communist rebels. South Africa is accused of supplying the rebels but denies any involvement. 
In 1981, China intervenes and helps Machel wipe out the insurgents, in exchange for a tighter control of their economy 
Mozambique gradually became a satellite state of China, with Machel being deposed in 1983 and a pro-Chen member taking his place
An oil industry is established in the late 1980s
After the Crash of 1988, there is a brief oil boom until 1990 when rebels pick up again. The lack of help from China causes their puppet government to fall and a distinctly soviet-style government takes its place 
This soviet-backed government is led by a man referred to as “The Stalin of Africa”. He uses extreme repression, genocide and deliberate famines to control the population
This new government only lasts until 1998, when South African forces instigate a civil war and take it over in 1999 
Throughout the 2000s, South Africa engages in extensive mining and natural gas extraction operations throughout Mozambique, while also setting up pipelines to direct water towards Rhodesia and South Africa
In 2004, the South Africans implement the “stew” system 
Between 2005-2018, numerous guerrilla groups launch uprisings against the GAR, finally culminating in the bombing of a pipeline in 2015 and a ruthless campaign of genocide 
Mozambique is kept on a very tight leash, with white officers usually going there to “take out their frustrations” on the locals 
In the 2020s, “safaris” are organized, where GAR officers comb the countryside to wipe out guerrillas for sport 
The Great Heatwave of 2023 cause disputes between white farm owners on how to allocate the water, with the Groot Leader forced to step in
In 2025 the GAR starts campaigns of ethnic cleansing against the natives to free up more resources for the whites, and also establishes heavily fortified military bases along the pipelines 
The 2026 solar storm causes a communication breakdown and several Xhosa guerillas launch a short-lived uprising
By 2027 most of Mozambique is abandoned, as the GAR no longer has the equipment or energy to access the minerals in the mountains 
Malawi (Population: 31,845,373, circa 2020)
Malawi becomes a totalitarian dictatorship like in OTL 
Because Malawi has little to no natural resources, many countries turn a blind eye. Morgan does not try to pressure them to become democratic 
In the 1980s, Malawi signs the Shanghai Accords of their volition but nothing ever comes of it
In the mid 1980s, Malawi tries to create a service industry and work as call centers for western countries but it doesnt pan out
After the crash of 1988, basically nothing changes, everyone in Malawi is still dirt poor and the leader is able to maintain a hold on his power 
A civil war happens in the aftermath of the Hot Summer of 1990 as some of Banda’s men believe they aren’t getting enough so they kill him in 1991 
In the 1990s, the civil war continues and eventually becomes warlords fighting each other for slaves and water
In 1998, South Africa rolls in to create “stability” but it’s really to gather water
Between 1998 and 2003, pipelines are built to send water from Malawi through Mozambique to South Africa and Rhodesia
Some of Banda’s men remained relatively okay with South Africa so the Boers find one and prop him up as the puppet leader to basically be totalitarian for them
However in 2011 they kill him and install a white leader there
Malawi isn’t hit that hard by the Great Heatwaves of 2015 and 2016, and in fact, the GAR has to send a bit of extra food there to keep the white soldiers satisfied
The Water Wars of 2015-2018 lead to many, many Malawi being killed, with a large genocide thouroughly depopulating the region 
In the 2020s, the GAR begins expanding out of Malawi into Tanzania
During the Second Great Heatwave of 2023 and 2024, Malawi actually is hit by drought 
In 2025, the GAR enacts cleansing campaigns like in Mozambique 
The 2026 solar flare does not damage any technology or cause any fires in Malawi, but it does cause the GAR to lose a major battle in Tanzania and retreat to Malawi
By 2027, Malawi is essentially a giant fortified water treatment plant used by the GAR
Zambia (Population: 20,704,534, circa 2020)
After 1973, China and the US pressures them to open up their mines for foreign investment
Kaunda finally relents in 1974, and opens up the country to foreign investment
This causes the government to gradually lose control on a lot of things like the Soviet Union did in the 1980s OTL
In 1978, Kaunda steps down and flees to the USSR
Elections are held in 1980 and 1984
Zambia becomes an industrialized capitalist democracy in the 1980s, focusing on the mining and export of copper 
Zambia becomes very close with China and even hosts a SIZ
This causes environmental issues in the mid 1980s and Zambia is forced to import food to feed its population 
After the crash of 1988, the military takes over and essentially controls only the mines, with the rural areas left to fend for themselves 
The military sells ore and metal to whoever will buy it, mainly Zaire, Tanzania and South Africa
In the 1990s, Zaire takes over parts of northern Zambia 
The military, using China’s old equipment, then engages in a war to take back northern territory from Zaire
This is when South Africa orchestrates a civil war between the military warlords, causing them to mostly wipe each other out. 
In 1996, South Africa annexes Zambia 
In the late 1990s, South Africa dismantles the factories and SIZ in Zambia to prevent a further uprising
In the 2000s, South Africa engages in extensive mining operations in Zambia. However, they are not that cautious about the environment this time, and use this dirty water for their slaves
During the summer of 2011, millions die from dehydration or water-borne diseases. The stew system is implemented around this time
Between 2011-2014, rebel groups begin to form, including escaped Xhosa
Between 2015-2018 Zambia is the site of a genocidal campaign by the GAR
Around 2019 the GAR runs out of energy to effectively extract the minerals from Zambia, so they turn it into a series of plantations
Between 2019 and 2023, Zambia sufferers from chronic droughts before the Great Heat Wave of 2023 and 2024 causes all the remaining farms to die up 
The GAR blames the blacks and starts engaging in operations to kill them en masse
However, rebels from the Congo and Tanzania come to their aid, leading to northern Zambia to be one of the “Dark Frontiers” and a major theater of the Ethiopian-GAR Water War
Between 2024-2026, the GAR starts making gains and actually reaching the Lualaba River
However, the solar storm of 2026 forces the GAR to retreat towards Zambia, where they create fortifications
By 2027, Zambia is facing daily incursions by the Ethiopians
Angola (Population: 47,281,072, circa 2020)
Angola was freed around the same time as Mozambique 
The civil war is resolved in a unique situation, however - the three main factions: The FNLA, the UNITA and the MPLA are all given an equal third of the country, which is ruled as a confederacy 
This goes about as well as you would expect it would, and by 1979, the civil war picks up again, with China and the United States supporting UNITA
By 1981, the civil war had died down mostly, with the UN working on creating an intergovernmental mandate to help police Angola (and keep it open to resources)
However, throughout the 1980s, guerilla warfare continues and Angola remains dangerous and poor. 
Frequent guerilla attacks make it impractical to extract resources
In 1988, after the crash, the UN leaves and the civil war picks up again, this time with support from the USSR
In 1989, the MPLA establishes their control and creates a soviet-style republic
Between 1989 and 1993, there are rumors that the Soviets are siphoning Angolan oil back to the motherland 
The Soviet Union helps establish farms and irrigation in Angola, which due to its large amount of fertile land, actually doesn't see any famines in the 1990s (as many people died from guerilla warfare) 
Flooding and storms throughout the 1990s cause internal friction and in 1994 the Soviets finally leave
Mismanagement of resources and soviet equipment cause massive amounts of land pollution and a major famine in 1997
The South-African backed remnants of UNITA and FNLA launch an uprising and civil war in 1998, with South Africa annexing them in 1999
In the 2000s, South Africa took a special interest in Angola. Flood walls were built along the coast, and pipelines were made to bring water from East Africa into Angola. Many military bases were established along the Angolan border, and White-owned businesses began to expand into Angola
China tries to help “modernize” Angola but the South Africans refuse
The Hot Summer of 2003 causes South Africa to begin building border walls along Angola’s border with Zaire and the Congo
Angola actually remains relatively well fed, as the majority of the food stuff for the whites comes from Angola (though the Groot Leader’s food is grown directly in South Africa) 
South Africa splits their operations equally between mining and farming, until 2011, when they prioritize it solely for farming and enact the stew policy 
Throughout the 2010s, Angola requires more and more water for their farming operations, eventually forcing the Water War of 2015-2018 to maintain their agriculture 
As agriculture gradually becomes less feasible, the GAR instead shifts to mining projects in the 2020s
The Great Heat Waves of 2023 and 2024 cause immense drought and millions to die of dehydration before extreme floods and storms devastate the region in 2025
The Solar Storm of 2026 causes the borders to become defenseless and various warlords try to invade, though many of them die in the heat
As of 2027, Angola has the last functional farms in the GAR outside of South Africa
Lesotho (Population: 1,295,876, circa 2020)
Lesotho doesn't have that many natural resources, so the remain relatively unchanged by the Shanghai Accords
Leabua Jonathan remains in power in an autocracy supported by South Africa all the way until 1990, where during the Hot Summer, South Africa annexes them for their water
Throughout the 1990s, as South Africa transitions to becoming the Totalitarian GAR, Lesotho essentially becomes a White-Only enclave 
By 2003, Lesotho is completely depopulated of natives and turned into a walled city for the Groot Leader and his close allies
In 2004, all the remaining “coloreds” are turned into servants employed in the vast estates in Lesotho 
Between 2004 and 2024, Lesotho remains a relatively calm place, isolated from the outside world, though a few assassins do get in and have failed attempts on the Groot Leader, taking place in 2010, 2014, 2022 and 2026
By 2022, Lesotho is the only place where natural food can be bought in the GAR (as by this point, all the “natural” food left over is processed into Food, Inc-style rations
The Solar Storm of 2026 causes a major disruption in the security systems of the Groot Leader’s Palace, with a failed coup against the Groot Leader by african-sympathetic whites 
As of 2027, Lesotho is a heavily-policed enclave, with the Groot Leader’s bunker being constructed by colored slaves 
Madagascar (Population: 42,838,153, circa 2020)
Maintained strong economic ties to France in the Glorious Decades, becoming a major tourist destination
With the help of France, the socialist revolution is crushed and Madagascar becomes a corrupt though somewhat democratic state
Living standards remained fine, but Madagascar became closely aligned with Europe
In the 1980s, the current president is very unpopular with a growing rebel movement springing up in the late 1980s
After the crash of 1988 and France pulling out support, a revolution happens and a one-party authoritarian socialist state is created, supported by the USSR
Drought and storms ravage the population throughout the 90s, but repression keeps them in check 
Pirates and crime rates are very high
China visits them in the 2000s and helps set up mining and off-shore drilling operations
China also helps defend them against pirates
In 2006, the Red Flu is spread to Madagascar through China, which later spreads to the mainland GAR in 2007
In 2007, after China leaves, the GAR invades Madagascar and turns it into a giant prison farm where they send criminals and later coloreds 
Flooding and storms continue to ravage the island, though the GAR holds on in the 2010s
In the 2020s, a colossal storm in 2023 causes over 25 million estimated deaths
Between 2024-2027 efforts to rebuild the farms are ongoing 
As of 2027, Madagascar’s farms are continually ravaged by storms and the GAR considering abandoning it
Swaziland (Population: 2,347,237, circa 1990)
History is very similar to Lesotho in the Glorious Decades, with South Africa essentially using it as a puppet state
South Africa annexes them in 1991
Swaziland is transformed into an enclave for “coloreds” loyal to the white regime 
However, by the 2000s, is it essentially a giant slum
The anti-GAR resistance movement, the Umnqophiso Wokuwa is founded here 
Frequent raids into Swaziland in the 2010s cause it essentially be turned into a prison 
In 2019, it is walled off completely and all resources in are turned off. The GAR sends white criminals to die there 
In the 2020s, Swaziland becomes essentially its own country, as the GAR leave it alone and occasionally organize purges. It is in anarchy, but there are small pockets of civilization. 
Swaziland was not impacted by the Solar Storm 
As of 2027, the resistance are organizing a full-scale uprising across the entire GAR
South Africa (Population: 74,126,015, circa 2020)
Apartheid continues as in OTL until the 1970s when it becomes extremely totalitarian 
In the 1980s, the state police assassinates many rebels and Xhosa nationalists
While South Africa does not sign the Shanghai Accords, they maintain good ties with Israel (and later East Germany) to circumvent the embargos 
The state controls the media starting in 1973
Journalists must be vetted by the government before being allowed in, and even then they can’t photograph certain things and also must be white
A group of right-wing white supremacists called the Boer Advocaten intimidate activists during the 1980s
West Germany is extremely vocal about all this, accusing South Africa of being nazis 
South Africa tries to influence politics of Botswana but fails
South Africa influences the politics of Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Angola, Lesotho, and Swaziland
South Africa barely hangs during the Glorious Decades, but because they had never invested in globalization, the Crash of 1988 doesn’t even phase them - though they do lose access to Israeli weapons 
South Africa immediately invades Namibia and formally takes it over in 1989
South Africa’s president, elected in 1989, Hendrik Coenraad Vermeulen, declares a state of emergency and gradually makes the country more and more autocratic. 
In the 1990s, South Africa’s main problem was energy, with coal and oil being reserved for the white minority 
South Africa annexes Lesotho in 1990, Swaziland in 1991, Zambia in 1996, Botswana in 1997, Malawi in 1998, Angola and Mozambique in 1999, Comoros in 2006 and Madagascar in 2007
In the late 1990s, things have gotten so segregated that there are entire “white only” cities 
Throughout the 1990s, South Africa begins organizing vast mining projects to get coal to power the white cities in South Africa
From 1990-2015, low-intensity guerrilla warfare remains a problem for the South Africans
In 2003, the white minority government begins to see the first reduction in quality of life
In 2004, the stew plan in made and the definition of a “black person” is expanded while the definition of a “white person” is reduced 
In 2005, all “coloreds” are relocated to the Swaziland enclave, made to be slaves in the Lesotho enclave, or sent to work in Madagascar
In 2006, South Africa merges with Rhodesia and is reformed into the Groot Afrikaanse Republiek
By 2011, water becomes the largest issue, with farms in places like Namibia shutting down
2011-2014 is the “Golden Age” of the GAR, with the whites building luxury homes all around southern Africa after a majority of the natives die of dehydration in 2011
From 2015-2018, the GAR engages in a genocidal campaign in retaliation for the destruction of the Mosambiek-Malawi-pyplyn
In 2016, the GAR almost has a civil war over water allocation
From 2019-2023, the GAR gets super evil, engaging in stuff like hunting natives for sport
But after the second Great Heatwave of 2023 and 2024, even the Groot Leader knows that things are going to end soon. Water becomes the utmost priority, and the GAR launches raids into central Africa for water, starting the GAR-Ethiopian Water Wars. He also authorizes the “liquidation” of 50% of the GAR black population
From 2024-2027, black people are forced to work during the day, with “the night for the whites” 
In 2026, East Germany tells the GAR about the conference and the plan for bunkers, a bunker begins to be constructed in Lesotho
The solar storm of 2026 devastates the GAR, with a major rebellion almost toppling the government 
By 2027, the definition of “white person” is literally only those in the inner circle of Nasionale Boereparty. Ethiopia is mounting a major offensive into southern Africa, and the Groot Leader begins planning to hide in his bunker




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_emerging_technologies#Energy
Imma be real they are not gonna be developing this shit in Food, Incverse except in some richer countries. Development already stalled in the Glorious Decades and with everyone broke they will be researching what we are using today.

Solar
Main type: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thin-film_solar_cell 
Developed in the 1970s OTL by soviets 
In this timeline developed by Japan first
Wind
Originally developed by the EF, in Denmark, in the 1990s
Geothermal
Japan dabbles with this in the 2010s
Hydropower
China mainly develops this in the 2000s and 2010s, though it leads to contamination of irrigation
In Japan, they also develop this in the 2000s
Nuclear power
Developed in secret by the Soviets first, then later by Europe, Australia, and Nordic Union and Poland
Also championed by Israel

USA
Mainly relies on coal and natural gas 
Some experiments into alternate energies were made by the Smith administration but nothing came of it 
Corn ethanol is made briefly in the 2000s before being considered a “waste of resources” by 2010
Attempts at building dams in the 1990s lead to collapse of river and water systems 
Canada
Mainly uses Hydroelectric power and solar power, with some wind power 
Mexico 
Attempts to invest into solar power, however, the government collapses into the junta before this can take effect, locking much of Latin America into coal-power 
Brazil
Oil is mainly used until 2002
Then, coal and wood burning, leading to further deforestation
In the 2010s, Brazil briefly looks into hydroelectricity 
Patagonian Union
Mainly uses coal, oil and natural gas until the 2010s
Develops nuclear power in the 2010s, though not as widespread as the USSR’s
Nordic Union
Also builds dams
Uses wind and nuclear 
UK 
Coal
Invests in wind and solar power in the 2000s
Ireland
Develops wind power in the 2010s
EF 
Coal
Damming rivers leads to accelerated desertification
Experiments in Solar and Nuclear power, mainly across the Mediterranean in the 2020s 
East Germany 
Uses nuclear power stolen from soviet scientists
Poland 
Uses a combination of hydroelectricity, wind, and nuclear power
USSR
Mainly develops nuclear energy 
Also uses peat from Siberian swamps
China
Uses coal and hydropower, though later on, they burn trash 
Experiments in developing solar panels in Africa, however mainland China ends up being too polluted to use solar energy efficiently 
Australia and New Zealand 
New Zealand uses geothermal in the 2020s as a substitute for nuclear 
Australia leads the world in development of nuclear, solar, and wind technology, and doubles down on nuclear
Australia still mines coal for “emergencies” 



Death spiral 
Global shipping becomes extremely slow by 2000, with it stopping completely by 2010
Planes are used only for cargo, and are still charted by 2027 but are used very sparingly 
Public transportation dries up in the USA by 2010, though it remains in a very bare-bones state in Europe and Japan. Europe shuts down their rail lines for “counter terrorism” reasons, and Japan finally shuts down theirs in 2024
Natural Gas collapses after oil, with most accessible supplies running out by 2023
Mass blackouts by 2015
Mass clothing recycling initiatives, with some rumors of clothes being made out of human hair
Pharmaceuticals stop being made around 2005, notably painkillers, anesthetics, and antibiotics
Fertilizers are no longer able to be made efficiently by 2010
Farm equipment is retrofitted to use dirty coal, but this causes increased contamination 
Cold storage becomes increasingly rare, with cities setting up “municipal freezers” to store perishable goods. Eventually there is a shift to creating non-perishable rations
Consumer goods and packaging disappear, many things like furniture are now deemed “unessential” and are burned 
Medical supplies become very hard to properly package
Due to the decrease in synthetic fibers, “patchwork” becomes a very popular style 
Lack of synthetic rubber causes many industries to break down, as they can’t make things like hoses and gaskets 
Electronics are harder to insulate, leading to them being more vulnerable to damage, more dangerous to humans, and also more energy inefficient 
Most things are made out of metal, wood and glass now, as opposed to plastic 
In the 1990s, most things become packaged in paper bags, glass bottles, or metal cans
Bioplastics explored in the 1990s

Christianity 
Catholic
Pope
the pope during the red decades claims that the environmental issues are because people aren't having enough children
in 2003 he dies during the heatwave
the papal concave takes 2 months to choose the next pope
the next pope is very anti-federation, and even covertly endorses the neo-crusaders before being assassinated (most likely by the Federation but no one can prove it)
the pope after him is very anti-natalist and pro-suicide, causes a rift in the church
he dies in the 2024 heatwave by voluntarily giving up his spot to save a woman from dying of heat exhaustion
the pope in 2026-2035 is extremely anti Federation and covertly supports resistance movements
in 2035, he dies of breathing problems and is replaced by the youngest man in the conclave (who is 34)
Also talk about how religion is viewed in patagonia
Orthodox
Ecumenical Patriarchs of Constantinople
The Patriarch of Moscow was executed by Savateev in 1994
For the most part, Eastern Orthodox Christianity dwindled significantly, and by the 2020s, it is only practiced in a few very isolated places, the notable ones include parts of the Nordic Union, ANZ, and Canada 
An underground church exists, mainly in Siberia
Oriental 
Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church
Most oriental orthodox are absorbed/convert to islam in the red decades, with it being pretty much extinct by the 2020s
Protestants
Lutherans are mainly found in the Nordic Union
Reformed is most common in Canada
Presbyterianism is most common in the USA and Europe
Congregationalism is mostly extinct 
Anglicism is outlawed by the EF after their war with the UK
Anabaptists are a dominant denomination in the USA
Pentacoastalism has mainly died out 
Mormonism becomes extremely popular in the USA
USA Demographics: in order of largest to smallest
Roman Catholic 
Mormonism
Presbyterianism 
Anabaptists
Eastern Orthodox
Lutheran
Reformed
Judaism 
Reform Judaism is the most popular sect of Judaism in the Glorious Decades
In response to the the Arab-Israeli war, jewish law becomes extremely important, and over time, many jews become more conservative (though not orthodox or ultra orthodox) 
Islam
Sunni
Grand Imam of al-Azhar
Sunni is the dominant sect of Islam in the Glorious Decades
There are many sectors of it, with different countries adhering to different practices of it
A sort of secular Islam dominated the Middle East for the majority of the Glorious Decades, as the advent of globalism exposed many to new ideas. Oil barons also were also constantly visiting new places and interacting with many people 
Some of the most notable artwork during the Glorious Decades were made by Islamic artists for kings, nobles, and barons of Middle Eastern countries (such as in UAE) 
However in 1987, a massive shift away from Sunni began to happen
Shia
Grand Ayatollah 
In 1981, a man in Al-Qatif starts preaching a return to a more fundamental style of Islam, saying that arab oil has turned life on earth stagnant and without spiritual meaning 
In the 1980s, he drifts around the middle east gaining followers 
In 1983, he arrives in Egypt, and begins a campaign of “penance” 
This sect of Islam, itself a derivative of Twelver Shi’ism, has an interpretation about the end times and believes that the Twelfth Imam will appear in Egypt upon the banks of the Nile
The movement, called Qatifism, claims that the world will soon end and point to the rampant hedonism and environmental destruction as the signs of this 
The new leader of Egypt, in 1987, takes advantage of this and starts to play into their fantasies, becoming widely popular and using it to foster his idea of an invasion of Israel 
This leads to a “global jihad” against Israel, though many islamic-majority countries only go as far as sanctioning Israel 
A few though take up arms, and this leads to the Sinai War 
After the Sinai War, the leader of Qatifism proclaims himself to be the true Mahdi and the Grand Ayatollah. He declares an apocalyptic war of terror to bring about a new age of spiritual fulfilment before the earth fully dies. He spends the majority of 1988-1992 acting as a warlord in the ruins of the Middle East, with him dying of radiation poisoning in 1993
By 2000, many have left the ruins of the Middle East, except on their Hajj (Mecca has become a relatively peaceful, if austere, city state), and have relocated mainly to Africa, where they eventually settle in the congo by the 2010s
Hinduism
In the Glorious Decades, Hinduism remains more of a philosophy than an actual religion
Some scholars even claim that earlier reports that Humanity was in the Kali Yuga are wrong, and that humanity has entered the Satya Yuga
After the Arab-Israeli war, Indian religious leaders/Politicians start preaching about adherence to Vishnu, and the idea that humans had escaped the Kali Yuga were proven false
Throughout the 90s, worshippers of Shiva start to gain prominence, and even revert to sacrificing cows 
Shiva worshippers start radicalizing, leading to the worship of shiva to be banned in 2001, and Shivan temples are destroyed by government forces
After the nuclear war, worship of Vishnu falls out of favor
Instead, Shiva and Yama (god of death) become the most worshipped gods in the indian subcontinent 
Cultists sacrifice people and animals to Shiva and Yama, hoping that doing so speed up the end of the current cosmic cycle and bring the survivors into the true Satya Yuga
By the 2010s, small isolated communities exist that still worship Vishnu, and even more have converted to Islam 
By the 2020s, the main proponents of Hinduism are violent zealots obsessed with Yama
By 2027, a few moderate Hindus exist in small isolated communities in the mountains of Nepal
Buddhism 
Buddhism is a popular religion in the Glorious Decades, with many using it only for meditation and not for achieving nirvana. 
The Middle Path is mainly forgotten, as many fall into the hedonistic lifestyle present 
After the crash, Pure Land buddhism takes off, with many people hoping to transport themselves to a new, pure land 
In the 90s, the deteriorating conditions lead to many buddhists to voluntarily sign up for dangerous humanitarian missions, with the hope of dying 
An entire section of the Chinese army is composed of Buddhists hoping to be reincarnated 
In 2002, a survivor of the Indian-Pakistani war proclaims himself the Maitreya, and as he dies of radiation poisoning, he writes what he calls “the fourth path”, a way of escaping Samsara, but not becoming a buddha. It involves having a “last night worth living”, with sex, drugs, and other worldly pleasures, before dying of poison. Everyone at the last night, except one, will kill themselves. The one person who survives is a monk who assures that everyone dies with no suffering, and then the monk/watcher goes on to organize another last night where he is the only who passes. 
By 2010 though, much of Buddhism has died out, with the survivors being “the Last Gurus”, who are incredibly jaded people who forgo the rites of the Last Night and just straight up kill people, though they do try to minimize their suffering. 
By 2020, much of what exists of Buddhism is just fanatical raiders forcibly reincarnating people 
By 2027, the last remnants of Buddhism are ironically in China, who have latched on to the hope of being reincarnated 
Other
In Africa, ancestor worship/polytheism makes a comeback 

Cults

I’ll research by country to see if there’s anything that could make interesting cults
Lords of the Outback
Basically Mad Max
Madre de la vida
A fertility cult in Latin America, promoted by the Cartels so that they have more workers, and also more “supplies” 
Chenism
In the 2010s, Chenism became a cult/religion, with peasants claiming that they aren’t having enough kids to satisfy Chairman Chen and that if they have enough kids, they will come back. Think cargo cults but with factories 
Cult of Europa
A sort of blend of german paganism fused with environmentalism 
Federal Church of Europe
Sort of like, Anglicism, but with Europe, and the “Archbishop of Brussels” is the chief spiritual leader. Opened in places like Greece, Ireland, the UK, Nordic Union. Saw very, very small numbers, and were wiped out during the European Revolution
Cipaldism
Popular movement in the USA, it focuses on self-sacrifice, suffering, and spiritual justice, and also considers empathy to be the most valued human emotion. 
The Way of Giving
Located in Anatolia, it is a combination of Christianity, Socialism, and zoro-astrastianism 
New Greek Pantheon 
Modernized version of ancient greek religion
The Pavers
Radical Seventh Day Adventists who believe that the math was wrong, and the second coming was in 1988
Church of Oppenheimer
Worship the life-giving power of the atom, believe that using atomic weapons in war is the utmost heresy, Dwight D. Eisenhower is viewed as a devil-like figure
Syrian Water cults
Basically a group of people who worship the water purification process
Leviticans
Basically christian Qatifists 
Dust Walkers
Cult in the southern tip of Yemen

Guide on how to “research” weapons: 

So a lot of the technology is stuck in the late 1970s for the west (so 1976-1979), early 1980s for the USSR (1980-1983), late 1960s for China (1966-1969), Early 1990s for Canada, Australia and New Zealand (1990-1993), and mid 1970s everywhere else (1974-1976)

Look at the military equipment for that time, change a few numbers (the number is usually the date it was made) then for the name, many vehicles/equipment are named after famous generals/warriors/leaders. 

For example:
Looking up what tank China used in the 1960s OTL: Norinco Type 62 
Change the name to a military commander in a war China fought in the 1960s (Sino-Vietnamese War): Norinco > Zhifu
Change the number to the year it was “refurbished”: Type 62 > Type 89x

USA
Main melee weapon: M4 Dual-Class Knife
Could be attached as a bayonet to the M17 or used in hand-to-hand combat

Main sidearm, infantry: Smith & Colt M1975a 
M1911 retooled to use 10mm 

Main sidearm, commanders: Smith & Colt Eagle
Revolver chambered in .38 special 

Main sidearm, covert operations: Jackson Armory “Meathook” S-6
Uses 9mm 

Main Infantry Assault Rifle: Smith & Colt M-17
5.56mm
Variants: HP, JHP, Incendiary, Pollutants
Basically an M-16 that didn’t jam 

Main minigun: General Electric M215 Microgun
Also uses 5.56 for added economy 

Main sniper rifle: Bonn Industries Checkpointer 
Originally prototyped in the 1970s and discounted, it was given a second chance as it was the best-performing sniper rifle that used 5.56mm 

Main SMG: Herzig and Konstantine Tsunami 
Used 9mm, however, it was discontinued in 2009 due to views of resource allocation

Main Shotgun: Lancaster 1888 Lever-Action Shotgun
Used 12ga shells, though it was mainly used by law enforcement and farm guards 

Main infantry SAW: Smith & Colt M360 
5.56mm as well 

Main mine: M19 Zweihander Anti-Personnel Mine
Used domestically by the Police after 2023

Main grenade: M-74a Fragmentation Grenade
Phased out in the 2010s due to concerns of resource allocation

Rocket Launcher: M-80 LAW
No longer produced as of 2013, though some National Guard Armories still have them

Main flamethrower: M-3 Flamethrower
Can be retrofitted to dispense a variety of chemicals, such as industrial pollutants, pepper gas, and other adverse chemicals
Law enforcement in smaller cities frequently use these for crowd control

Main Artillery: M-109 Howitzer 

Main Anti-Aircraft Gun: Bofa D-69 
Became obsolete after the crash and the reduction of air forces

Main Helicopter: UH-2 Dakota

Only used in Vietnam, Afghanistan, and by the UNADTF, disassembled for parts by the second Smith Administration due to fuel shortages
Main transport aircraft: AC-179 Hephestus 
Cheap, easy to make cargo plane made in 1997 

Main jet craft: Lockheed-Douglas HS-A M402 Yellowjacket
Saw extensive use in Vietnam, Afghanistan, the UNADTF, and several other proxy wars before the Crash of 1988 made supersonic aircraft useless. Became all rusted and useless by 1992

Main transport truck: AAM M-93 Truck
Old trucks retrofitted by the AAM to use coal

Main tank: M-125 McCain

Retrofitted to use coal power in the 2000s
Main naval craft: AAM M-08 Gunboat
Only saw extremely limited use in the Great Lakes and the Battle of Vancouver

Main nuclear submarine: Van-Buren Class 

US Army - re-organized into cannon fodder in the 2020s. 
Strength: 35 million members as of 2027
Main Uniform: “Green Bay Grays” 

US Marines - all previous soldiers in the army were “promoted” to the Marines, and are used in missions in Canada that are actually important, and aren’t just sent there to die 
Strength: 4.3 million members of 2027

US Navy - significantly downsized, and now operated by Food, Inc, though a few naval battles occurred in the Invasion of Canada
Strength: 20,000 members as of 2027

US National Guard - merged with police, now called the United States Police Force
Strength: 2.8 million members across the USA (mainly concentrated around the major cities) 

Soldiers would wear trench coats to differentiate them from normal police 
US Air Force - disbanded in 2015
US Coast Guard - Merged with navy in 1999
EF
USSR
Main handgun: PSS-3 Pistol
Usually used by military personnel in civilian areas 
Uses .45 ACP 

Main revolver: Tula-1917 Revolver
Used by military commanders 
Uses 7.62mm 

Main assault rifle: AKS-83p
Uses 5.45mm
Later models removed the wood furniture to replace it with metal/plastic

Main marksman rifle: VSS-83 
Uses 10mm 
Mainly used by police forces 

Main LMG: RPD-K81
Uses 7.62mm
Later models removed the wood furnishing 

Main Grenade Launcher: GP-37
Only used in Afghanistan and in the Yugoslav War

Main rocket launcher: RPG-31 Lenin
Only used in the Yugoslav War and the Second Civil War

Main mine: OZM-88
Mainly used for mining the Central Asian SSRs when they were evacuated 

Main flamethrower: RPO-4
The USSR was unique in that they launched incendiary grenades/chemical weapons with modified rocket launchers instead of conventional flame throwers

Main mortar: 2S13 Zima

Main hand grenade: RGO-2

Main tank: T-81u
Used in all major battles the soviets were involved in
In the 2010s, they began to be retrofitted to use nuclear powered batteries 

Main APC: BTR-84
In the 2010s, they began to be retrofitted to use nuclear powered batteries

Main fighter jet: YaK-26 
In the 2010s, a very small amount of them have been retrofitted to use nuclear powered batteries

Main bomber: Tu-83
Used extensively in the Yugoslav War 

Main submarine: D-408 “Tunguska” 

Soviet Ground Forces: Main armed forces in the USSR
Strength: 31 million members

Soviet Air Forces: Merge of the Soviet Air Defence Forces, Strategic Rocket Forces, and Soviet Airborne Forces
Strength: 215,000 members 

Soviet Navy: Mainly responsible for transporting equipment as naval battles have become very infrequent (last major one was during the Nordic War)
Strength: 510,000 members 
\
Soviet People’s Militia: Replaced the police after the Second Civil War
Strength: 6.7 million 

China
Main handgun: Type 84c Handgun
Uses 9mm
Based on a Soviet Pistol

Main assault rifle: Type 91x Assault Carbine
Uses 7.62mm
Based off the AK-47

Main submachine gun: Type 91v SMG
Uses 10mm 
The Chinese had a different philosophy when it came to calibers and automatic weapons: They preferred automatic weapons and multiple calibers, as it gave variety to factory workers 

Main machine gun: Type 83p MG
Uses .45 ACP 

Main grenade: Type 70 Grenade 
China did not use as many grenades as other nations

Main flamethrower: Type 92p Flamethrower 
Frequently used in Taiwan

Main rocket launcher: Type 87d RPG
A copy of a Soviet rocket launcher
Used when friendly fire wasn’t a concern (operations in Taiwan, India, Japan, and were to be used in Australia) 

Main mortar/artillery: Type 91i Mortar
Based off a Soviet design

Main howitzer: Type 68-r Howitzer
Based off a mix of Soviet and Japanese designs

Main anti-aircraft gun: Type 90y AA
China invested heavily in anti-aircraft weaponry and basically never got the chance to use them. They carried them all the way to India in the 2000s

Main aircraft: Type 92u Shenzai 
Participated in massive bombing runs in Indochina, Mongolia and Taiwan

Main Tank: Zhifu Type 89x
Saw massive use in all major wars China participated in, all the way to the Invasion of the USSR in 2027
Retrofitted to use coal in the 2000s

Main APC: Lin Type 90h APC
Saw use mainly in Mongolia and Indochina, discontinued in the 2000s as it was seen as a waste of resources

Main transport truck: Deifong Type 94r Truck
Originally created for military service, it instead was retrofitted to use coal power and then used for transportation of supplies in civilian areas 

Main naval craft: Yangtze Type 88y Boat
China invested heavily in these all the way to the late 2010s as they constantly expected the Soviet Union/Japan/Australia to attack them on their coast

Main nuclear submarine: Type 90

People’s Liberation Army Ground Forces: Treated as cannon fodder much like the US Army
Strength: 40 million members as of 2027

People’s Liberation Army Naval Forces: Downsized compared to the Ground Forces
Strength: 750,000 active members as of 2027
People’s Liberation Army Rocket Force: Controls China’s nuclear arsenal 
Strength: 240,000 active members as of 2027
People’s Armed Police: Militarized law enforcement of China, replaced local police in 1973
Strength: 7.8 million members

People’s Liberation Army Air Force: Disbanded as of 2015
Canada
Brazil
Main Sidearm: Torus-PT80
Uses 9mm
Originally developed for the UNADTF

Main SMG: Torus-PT88
Uses 9mm
Developed by Italy for the UNADTF

Main combat rifle: Fuzil M965
Uses 7.62mm 
Based off the Belgian FAL, special version for the UNADTF

Main shotgun: Mossman M650b 
Uses 12ga 
Based on American shotguns, special version for UNADTF

Main LMG: FN M651
Uses 7.62mm
Mainly used by the UNADTF and later at border checkpoints

Main sniper rifle: Regal Arms 700
Uses 7.62mm
Mainly used by the UNADTF, but became obsolete against gurellias 

Main Grenade Launcher: M79d
Originally produced by the UNADTF, but rarely used until the 90s

Main mortar: MMA-x
Developed by the Brazilain military in the 90s

Main tank: M41 Lynx
Became unusable by 2007 as they ran out of fuel 

Main transport truck: BE-20
Became unusable by 2008

Main helicopter: HM-2 Striker
Mainly used by the UNADTF, were phased out by 2000

Main fighter jet: BSF-Tunisia
Mainly used by the UNADTF, stopped being used by 2003

Main naval craft: BSF-Humanity 
Became obsolete in the late 2010s as they were either all captured by pirates or cartels
Some were retooled to use coal

Main naval patrol craft: BMP-Amazonas
Still used all the way to 2027, just not by Brazil

Brazilian Imperial Army: Main ground forces in Brazil
Strength: 100,000 as of 2027, peaked at 27 million in 2006

Brazilian Imperial Defense Force: Main air force in Brazil
Strength: <50 in 2027, peaked at 560,000 in 2006

Brazilian Maritime Fleet: Main naval force of Brazil
Strength: not controlled by Imperial Brazil by 2027, but peaked at 1.9 million in 2006

Brazilian Imperial Militia: Main law enforcement division in Brazil, made from many ex-UNADTF members 
Strength: 23,000 as of 2027, but peaked at 4.2 million in 2011

Cartels - All of their equipment was either stolen from UNADTF depots, bought on the black market, or given by Brazil
Main APC: Panhard VCR 
Some were modified to use coal

Main truck: M420 Butterfly
Some were modified to use coal

Main battle rifle: H&K AR3
Uses 7.62mm

Main assault rifle: H&K S34
Uses 5.56mm

Main SMG: H&K MP8s
Uses 9mm

Main pistol: Smith & Colt M1975 Series 3
Uses 9mm

Main marksman rifle: H&K PSG-R1
Uses 7.62mm

Main LMG: H&K S421
Uses 7.62mm

Main HMG: M3 Browning Emplacement
Uses .50 BMG
Some models were later retooled to use the much more common 7.62mm

Main Mortar: ML32 

Black Rose Security Forces: The largest cartel army 
Strength: Between 6-8 million

Communist Mexico/Peru/Venezuela/Brazil - many supplies were granted by Argentina/USSR
Main troop transport vehicle: HWK-6

Made obsolete by 2005 as Mexico was not able to develop coal-powered vehicles
Main battle tank: T-56u
Old tank made by the Soviets, sold to Argentina and then retrofitted to use coal power.
About 11 were given to Peruvian rebels

Main infantry rifle: Mondragon M1908b
Uses 7.62mm

Main Assault rifle: VW-76i 
Uses 7.62mm
Old obsolete weapons sold to Argentina by East Germany, and then given to communist rebels by dead drops

Main SMG: FMK-4
Uses 9mm
Provided by Argentina

Main Machine Gun: APRK-PG 62a
Uses 7.62mm
Old Warsaw Pact weaponry sold to Argentina and then smuggled by dead drops to rebels

Main sniper rifle: SVG-V5 
Uses 7.62mm 
Old Warsaw Pact weaponry 

Main anti-tank weapon: RPG-30 “Chubacabra” 
Based on Soviet/Chinese designs 

Main artillery: D-29 Howitzer
Given to Peru by Argentina

Mexican People’s Army: Main guerrilla force fighting against the Cartels
Strength: 700,000 as of 2027, but estimated to have peaked at 7.6 million in 2010

Peruvian Revolutionary Forces (Colorado Army): Main guerilla fighting force in Peru, used as a proxy by the Patagonian Alliance
Strength: 560,000 as of 2027, peaked at 2.4 million in 2014

Red Hand Guerrilla Insurgency: Main fighting force of Venezuela, used as proxy by the Patagonian Alliance
Strength: 270,000 in 2027, peaked at 4.1 million in 1997

Brazilian Rebel Coast: Main rebel force in Brazil, used as a proxy by the Patagonian Alliance
Strength: 2.4 million in 2027

Mexican Air Force: Disbanded in 1996
Mexican Navy: As the Mexicans couldn’t get coal-powered stuff to work, the few old ships that still used coal were captured by the Cartels
Peruvian Air Force: Disbanded in 1990s after Brazil took them over
Peruvian Navy: Disbanded in 1990s after Brazil took them over
Venezuelan Air Force: Disbanded in 1990s after Brazil took them over
Venezuelan Navy: Disbanded in 1990s after Brazil took them over
Patagonia
Main battle tank: TAM-105 Colorado

Main APC: T-167 Santa Fe

Main truck: T-68 Santa Cruz

Main Artillery: L44 

Main anti-tank weapon: HM-Portua
Mainly used in the invasion of Brazil

Main pistol: FM-5 
Uses 9mm 
Based off Belgian designs 
\
Main SMG: FMK-4
Uses 9mm

Main Shotgun: FM-72
Uses 12ga
Based of American designs
Mainly used in jungle combat 

Main rifle: FM-88 
Uses 7.62mm
Based on Belgian designs but adopted by Argentina gunsmiths
Modified to be only semi-auto

Main Machinegun: FM-160
Uses 7.62mm
Mainly used in machinegun nests along the border with Brazil

Main sniper rifle: FM-88-M
Uses 7.62mm
Modified FM-88 
Rarely used 

Main mine: FMK-M
Used extensively along the border with Brazil
Based on Soviet mines

Main fighter jet: IA-74
Very rarely used now

Main transportation aircraft: FM-34
Only used for transporting important individuals when a train is too slow

Main nuclear submarine: FM-1 Santiago 
Very early prototype, only 3 made in 2027

Main naval craft: FM-7 Peron

Patagonian United Land Forces: Consolidated armies of Argentina, Bolivia, Uruguay, Paraguay and Chile
Strength: 9.4 million

Patagonian Military Police: Consolidated law enforcement of Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, and Paraguay
Strength: 12.1 million

Patagonian Naval Fleet: Consolidated naval forces of Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay
Strength: 275,000

Patagonian Air Defence Forces: Consolidated air forces of Argentina and Chile 
Strength: 40,000
UK
Ireland
Nordic Union
Switzerland
East Germany
Main pistol: SW-73 Volkswaffe
Uses 9mm 
Based off old german designs

Main rifle: VV-67 Befreier
Uses 7.62mm

Main infantry weapon: VW-81c Sturmgewehr 

Basically AK-74s manufactured in East Berlin 
Main tank: PT-71

Main artillery: VR-23r 

National Army of Europa (Nationalarmee Europas): Merge of all armed forces
Strength: 4.3 million

State Police of Europa: Replaced the Stasi and regular police in 2013
Strength: 2.7 million

Poland
Ethiopia
GAR
Japan
Main melee weapon: Gunto “New-War”
Based off old WW2 designs

Main infantry sidearm: MB-P10
Uses 9mm 

Main police sidearm: S&C Revolver
Uses .357

Main SMG: MB-P11
Uses 9mm

Main battle rifle: Type 72 Battle Rifle
Uses 7.62mm

Main LMG: Type 76 LMG
Uses 7.62mm

Main anti-tank weapon: CG-N49
Mainly used during the third Sino-Japanese war

Main mortar: HW-M3

Main infantry vehicle: Type 92 APC
Very rarely used due to Japan’s rocky terrain

Main destroyer: Sakura-Class 
Primarily used to protect fishing vessels

Main aircraft: KS-C4
Very rarely used due to fuel scarcity 

Japanese New Army: Formerly the Japanese Ground Self-Defense Force
Strength: 3.4 million as of 2027, peaked at 8 million in 2009

Japanese Maritime Defense Fleet: Formerly the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force
Strength: 280,000 as of 2027, peaked at 760,000 in 2009

Japanese Strategic Defense Forces: Formerly the Japan Air Self-Defense Force
Strength: 25,000 as of 2027, peaked at 34,000 in 2009
Japan’s aircraft rusted significantly in the 1990s, though they have recently bought old equipment from Australia and New Zealand. 
Mainly operates anti-aircraft guns and blimps

Steward Society Law Enforcement Branch: Replaced the Japanese police 
Strength: 170,000 as of 2027
Also doubles as emergency services

Australia + New Zealand
Main nuclear submarine: FANZS Bennet-Class 

Main frigate: FANZS Hurley Class

Main utility aircraft: FAAF Koori

Main bomber: FAAF Merryweather

Main APC: FAA-237 Slayer
Uses coal 

Main melee weapon: FAA-87 Phlanax 
Based on American designs 

Main infantry weapon: FAA-95 Steyr
Uses 5.56mm

Main precision rifle: FAA-90 Hornet
Uses 7.62mm

Main machine gun: FAA-86 LMG
Uses 7.62mm

Main sidearm: FAA-87 Expert
Uses .45 ACP
Based on german designs

Main Shotgun: FAA-94 Bushwacker
Uses 12ga 
Used only by military police in urban environments
Based on American designs

Main grenade: F3 Grenade 

Main anti-tank weapon: FAAF-76 Adamantium
Mainly used during the defense of Australia against China

Main mortar: FAAF-98 Kookiburra 
Used extensively during the invasion of Antarctica 

Main howitzer: FAAF-2002 Howitzer
Used extensively during the defense of Australia and the invasion of Antarctica 

Federal Armed Forces of Australia and New Zealand: Merging of the Army of Australia and New Zealand, and also removing the vestiges of British control
Strength: 1.4 Million

Combined Naval Fleet of Australia and New Zealand: Merging of the Naval forces of Australia and the Naval and Air Forces of New Zealand 
Strength: 90,000 

Federal Air Defense Forces of Australia: Australian Air Force, though mainly focused on reconnaissance and transportation
The only Air Force still active as of 2027
Strength: 25,000

Federal Militia of Australia and New Zealand: main law enforcement agency in ANZ, established in 2015
Strength: 340,000


Nuclear Wars

Sinai War
Iraq nukes Tel Aviv - Stage 1
Tel Aviv - direct hit
Israel retaliates as Jerusalem has been broken into and Tel Aviv has been nuked. They target Iraq first - Stage 2
Bagdad - Direct hit
Mosul - Direct hit 
Basrah - Direct hit
Erbil - Direct hit
Kirkuk - Direct hit
West Qurna field - Direct hit
Artawi field - Direct hit
Az Zubair field - Direct hit
East Baghdad field - Direct hit
Hamrin field - Direct hit
Majnoon field - Direct hit
Nahr Umr field - Direct hit
Iraq, now with nothing left to lose, targets Iran and Israel again, this time with the intention of causing as much damage as possible - Stage 3
Haifa - Direct hit
Rishon LeZion - Indirectly destroyed due to the first nuke
Tehran - Miss
Isfahan - Direct hit
Ahvaz - Direct hit
Abteymour field - Direct hit
Ahvas field - Direct hit, though already destroyed by the previous nuke
Bibi Hakimeh field - Direct hit
Gachsaran field - Direct hit
Karanj field - Direct hit, though already destroyed by previous nukes
Kupal field - Direct hit, though already destroyed by previous nukes
Mansouri field - Direct hit, though already destroyed by previous nukes
Marun field - Direct hit
Masjed Soleyman field - Direct hit
Rag Sefid field - Direct hit
Shadegan field - Direct hit, through already destroyed by previous nukes
Israel fires off the rest of their volley as Egypt and the rest of their allies are refusing to back down - Stage 4
Cairo - Shot down
Suez - Direct hit
Amman - Direct hit
Irbid - Direct hit
Aleppo - Direct hit
Damascus - Direct hit
Al-Omar field - Direct hit
Khartoum - Miss
Riyadh - Direct hit
Iran, feeling betrayed by both Israel and the rest of the Arab world, launches their nukes - Stage 5
Abqaiq field - Direct hit
Ghawar field - Direct hit
Shaybah field - Direct hit
A group of Qatifists get control of the last remaining nukes in Iraq’s arsenal and begin a bombing run before being shot down - Stage 6
Dead Sea - Direct hit
Persian Gulf - Direct hit
Indian-Pakistani War of 2002
TBA
WW3 (nuclear stage)
China launches an all-out invasion into the USSR, breaching a section of the border wall in Chita Oblast, and invading through Manchuria and Mongolia
USSR Attacks China - Stage 1
On 13 June, with the Chinese merely 50 KM into the USSR, Savateev launches nukes. The targets are:
China
Shanghai: Direct hit
Beijing: Direct hit
Guangzhou: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Shenzhen: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Tianjin: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Chongqing: Direct hit
Hong Kong: Direct hit
Dongguan: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Nanjing: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Wuhan: Direct hit
Mongolia
Darkhan: Missed
Arvaikheer: Missed
Ulaanbaatar (New Beijing): Direct hit
Erdenet: Direct hit
Choibalsan: Direct hit
Mörön: Direct hit
Khovd: Direct hit
Bayankhongor: Direct hit
North Korea
Pyongyang: Direct hit
Hamhung: Direct hit
Chongjin: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Nampo: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Wonsan: Direct hit
Sinuiju: Direct hit
Tanchon: Direct hit
Kaechon: Direct hit
Kaesong: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Sariwon: Direct hit
South Korea
Seoul: Direct hit
Busan: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Incheon: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Daegu: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Daejeon: Direct hit
Gwangju: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Suwon: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Ulsan: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Changwon: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Goyang: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Vietnam
Saigon: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Hanoi: Direct Hit
Haiphong: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Cần Thơ: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Da Nang: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Huế: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Biên Hòa: Miss
Thủ Đức: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Thuận An: Miss
Dĩ An: Miss
Laos
Vientiane: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Savannakhet: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Pakse: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Luang Prabang: Direct hit
Xam Neua: Direct hit
Phonsavan: Miss
Thakhek: Direct hit
Muang Xay: Miss
Xaisomboun: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Pakxan: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Cambodia
Phnom Penh: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Siem Reap: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Battambang: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Serei Saophoan: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Poipet: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Ta Khmau: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Sihanoukville: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Samraong: Direct hit
Pursat: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Kampong Thom: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Thailand
Bangkok: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Nonthaburi: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Pak Kret: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Hat Yai: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Chaophraya Surasak: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Surat Thani: Miss
Nakhon Ratchasima: Direct hit
Chiang Mai: Direct hit
Udon Thani: Direct hit
Pattaya: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Myanmar
Yangon: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Mandalay: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Naypyidaw: Direct hit
Bago: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Hpa-an: Miss
Taunggyi: Miss
Monywa: Direct hit
Myitkyina: Direct hit
Mawlamyine: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Magway: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
China retaliates (Stage 2)
Most of the nukes don’t even make direct hits, but destroy dams and levees built by the Chinese to flood multiple large cities at once. China retaliates: 
Russia
Moscow: Direct hit
Leningrad: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Novosibirsk: Direct hit
Yekaterinburg: Miss
Kazan: Miss
Krasnoyarsk: Miss
Gorky: Miss
Chelyabinsk: Direct hit
Ufa: Direct hit
Krasnodar: Direct hit
Ukraine
Kyiv: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Kharkiv: Miss
Odesa: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Dnipro: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Donetsk: Direct hit
Lyiv: Miss
Zaporizhzhia: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Kryvyi Rih: Direct hit
Sevastopol: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Mykolaiv: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Moldova
Chișinău: Direct hit
Tiraspol: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Bălți: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Bender: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Rîbnița: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Ungheni: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Cahul: Direct hit
Soroca: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Orhei: Miss
Dubăsari: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Belarus
Minsk: Direct hit
Gomel: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Mogilev: Direct hit
Vitebsk: Direct hit
Grodno: Miss
Brest: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Babruysk: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Baranavichy: Direct hit
Barysaw: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Pinsk: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Lithuania
Vilnius: Direct hit
Kaunus: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Klaipėda: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Šiauliai: Direct hit
Panevėžys: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Alytus: Direct hit
Marijampolė: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Mažeikiai: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Jonava: Direct hit
Utena: Direct hit
Latvia
Riga: Direct hit
Daugavpils: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Liepāja: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Jelgava: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Jūrmala: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Ventspils: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Rēzekne: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Valmiera: Miss
Ogre: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Jēkabpils: Miss
Estonia
Tallinn: Direct hit
Tartu: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Narva: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Pärnu: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Kohtla-Järve: Miss
Viljandi: Miss
Rakvere: Miss
Maardu: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Sillamäe: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Valga: Miss
Finland
Helsinki: Direct hit
Espoo: Miss
Tampere: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Vantaa: Miss
Oulu: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Turku: Miss
Jyväskylä: Miss
Kuopio: Miss
Lahti: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Pori: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Symbolic Targets: cities already abandoned but China still nuked for symbolic reasons
Tselinograd (Kazakhstan)
Frunze (Kyrgyzstan)
Tashkent (Uzbekistan)
Dushanbe (Tajikistan)
Ashkhabad (Turkmenistan) 
Baku (Azerbaijan)
Yerevan (Armenia) (Missed)
Tbilisi (Georgia) 
Istanbul (Turkey)
Tehran (Iran)
Kabul (Afghanistan) (Missed) 
New Delhi (India)
Taipei (Taiwan) 
Jerusalem (Israel)
Osaka (Japan) (Shot down)
Brussels (EF) (Shot down)
Washington, DC (Shot down)
Moscow’s Dead Man’s Switch (Stage 3)
With the destruction of Moscow, the Dead Man’s Hand activates and nukes other places automatically 
Stockholm, Nordic Union: Shot down
Oslo, Nordic Union: Shot down
Warsaw, Poland: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Berlin, East Germany: Shot down
Prague, East Germany: Shot down
Bratislava, Poland: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
Budapest, Poland: Missed
Bucharest, Romania: Direct hit
Sofia, Bulgaria: Direct hit
Skopje, North Macedonia: Direct hit
Podgorica, Montenegro: Direct hit
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina: Direct hit
Ljubljana, Slovenia: Direct hit
Zagreb, Croatia: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Belgrade, Serbia: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Tiranë, Albania: Direct hit
Brussels, EF: Direct hit
Bonn, EF: Shot down
Paris, EF: Direct hit, though already abandoned
Rome, EF: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Lisbon, EF: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Luxembourg, EF: Shot down
Amsterdam, EF: Direct hit, though already abandoned
Copenhagen, EF: Destroyed indirectly due to a floodwall being destroyed
London, UK: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Athens, Greece: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Madrid, EF: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Maseru, GAR: Direct hit
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Direct hit, though already destroyed by Argentina (through conventional warfare and siege tactics, not nukes)
Buenos Aires, Patagonia: Shot down
Caracas, Venezuela: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Havana, Cuba: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Mexico City, Mexico: Direct hit
Washington, DC, USA: Direct hit
Charleston, USA: Direct hit
Philadelphia, USA: Direct hit
Pittsburgh, USA: Direct hit
Boston, USA: Direct hit
Ottawa, USA: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USA
New York City, USA: Shot down
Seattle, USA: Shot down
Portland, USA: Shot down
Chicago, USA: Shot down
Twin Cities, USA: Shot down
Detroit, USA: Shot down
Toronto, USA: Shot down
Winnipeg, USA: Direct hit
Los Angeles, USA: Direct hit, though already abandoned
Dallas, USA: Direct hit, though already abandoned
Houston, USA: Direct hit, though already abandoned
Miami, USA: Direct hit, though already abandoned
Atlanta, USA: Direct hit, though already abandoned
Phoenix, USA: Direct hit, though already abandoned
Calgary, USA: Direct hit
Anchorage, USA: Shot down
Canberra, ANZ: Direct hit
Wellington, ANZ: Shot down
Europa Strikes Back (stage 4) 
The USSR’s scorched earth tactics have laid waste to many cities and historical capitals around the world. In the midst of the European Revolution, the German War of Reunification, and the Federal Civil War, in addition to the destruction of many prominent cities in West Europe, FulTec authorizes Operation: Ichabod, sending their own (much smaller) volley of nukes. 
Berlin, East Germany: Direct hit
Oslo, Nordic Union: Direct hit
Stockholm, Nordic Union: Shot down
Warsaw, Poland: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Prague, East Germany: Direct hit
Budapest, Poland: Direct hit
Bucharest, Romania: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Sofia, Bulgaria: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Skopje, North Macedonia: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Podgorica, Montenegro: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Ljubljana, Slovenia: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Zagreb, Croatia: Direct hit, though already abandoned and destroyed by the USSR
Belgrade, Serbia: Direct hit, though already abandoned and destroyed by the USSR
Tiranë, Albania: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Bern, Switzerland: Shot down
London, UK: Direct hit, though already abandoned and destroyed by the USSR
Dublin, Ireland: Shot down
Washington, DC: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Ottawa, USA: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USA and now the USSR
Athens, Greece: Direct hit, though already abandoned and destroyed by the USSR
Istanbul, Turkey: Direct hit, though already destroyed by China
European Free-for-all (stage 5)
The British Revolutionary Government, operating out of Manchester, authorizes to launch retaliatory nukes against Brussels and the USSR. They only have enough time to launch two nukes though, and pick Brussels and Moscow, despite them both being destroyed already. 
Brussels, EF: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Moscow, USSR: Shot down and lands in Gdańsk, Poland, which was already destroyed by the USSR breaking the Baltic Dam 
The Nordic Union’s Emergency Government, already mostly evacuated to Svalbard, launches a few nukes into Poland and the EF, believing them to be the ones who nuked them. They do not launch any nukes at the USSR out of fear.
Warsaw, Poland: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR and EF
Łódź, Poland: Shot down
Kraków, Poland: Direct hit
Brussels, EF: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR, China, and UK
The National Army of Europa, upon learning of Berlin’s destruction, becomes demoralized and authorizes the use of their very tiny arsenal. They would have attempted to nuke Beijing, if they had the range. 
Brussels, EF: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR, China, UK, and Nordic Union
Versailles, EF: Direct hit
London, UK: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR and EF
Warsaw, Poland: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR, EF and Nordic Union
Moscow, USSR: Direct hit, though already destroyed by China and the EF
Kowalski earns the name “Mad King” by deciding to launch as many nukes as he can. The few left, being old, rusted ones from the 60s, are extremely shoddy and several go off in bunkers, destroying and irradiating much of the area along the Polish-German border. A few manage to make it out of the silos.
Stockholm, Nordic Union: Missed, lands in the Baltic Sea
Moscow, USSR: Direct hit, though already destroyed by China, the EF, and East Germany
Berlin, East Germany: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
The War for Antarctica (stage 6)
Australia, upon learning that Canberra was destroyed and that Wellington had almost had the same fate, immediately mobilized their tiny arsenal to destroy “those godless communists in South America”. This reckless action was not approved by New Zealand and caused their rift to only widen.
Buenos Aires, Patagonia: Direct hit
Montevideo, Patagonia: Direct hit
Asunción, Patagonia: Direct hit
La Paz, Patagonia: Direct hit, though already abandoned 
Santiago, Patagonia: Shot down
Argentina, upon seeing their capital nuked, rolled up their sleeves and launched their infant bombs, also believing the nukes to be from South America
Sao Paulo, Brazil: Direct hit, though already destroyed.
Brasilia, Brazil: Direct hit
Porto Velho, Brazil: Direct hit
Cusco, Peru: Direct hit
Lima, Peru: Direct hit, despite being abandoned 
Quito, Ecuador: Direct hit
Bagota, Colombia: Miss
Caracas, Venezuela: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR and abandoned 
Brazil’s Emergency Government, going down swinging, tries to use their nuclear weapon. It fails, and the warhead detonates in the bunker underneath Rio de Janeiro. 
Ensuring Continuity (Stage 7) 
The day after, June 14th, the US wakes up to find almost half the world destroyed. Deducting that many governments likely already have bunkers around the world, the US wants to ensure that they remain on top (or at least attempt to). They covertly launch dirty bombs at certain zones to stagnate eventual recovery efforts. 
Brussels, EF: Direct hit, despite already being destroyed by the USSR, UK, Nordic Union, and East Germany
Ottawa, USA: Direct hit, deliberately low yield 
Mexico City, Mexico: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Havana, Cuba: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Buenos Aires, Patagonia: Direct hit, though already destroyed by Australia
London, UK: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR, EF, and East Germany
Stockholm, Nordic Union: Misses, lands somewhere in the North Sea
Berlin, East Germany: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR and Poland
Milan, EF: Direct hit
Kabul, Afganistan: Missed, lands somewhere in the Caspian
Vladistostok, USSR: Direct hit
Hanoi, Vietnam: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Beijing, China: Direct hit, though already destroyed by the USSR
Cape Town, GAR: Direct hit, though already abandoned
Final gasps (Stage 8)
The world begins to go silent. Over 2 billion have died as a result of the nuclear weapons, and 2 billion more die from Project Eyes of Heaven. Two more minor nuclear exchanges happen though: 
July 23: The USSR finds out where the Federation/FulTec remnants are hiding, and nukes Iceland into the stone ages
August 3: President Williamson gets control of the nuclear arsenal of the rapidly fracturing United States and launches a few more nukes, targeting Berlin and Moscow (already destroyed and ravaged by Eyes of Heaven) 

Food Inc, Products
E-Z Steak - Tofu vegan steak made from corn and beans
Ration Alpha - Cracker made from corn and wheat
Ration Beta - Cracker made from tomato extract and other vegetables
Ration Gamma - Cracker made from wheat, jellyfish blooms and cockroaches
Ration Epsilon - Cracker made from wheat, algae and sea salt
Ration Omega - Cracker made from wheat and people
FulTec Products
FulTec Val-U Bar - Energy bar made from wheat, oats, corn, tomatoes, and onions
FulTec Natural - Energy bar made from wheat and insects
FulTec Plenty - Granola Bar with human flesh mixed in
Siliao Products
Revolutionary Nutritional Package - Tofu vegan steak made from wheat and rice
People’s Nourishment - Block of jellied human flesh mixed in with wheat and rice 
USSR Food
Farmer’s Bounty - Poorly made bread with bits of dirt in it for “vitamins”
UK Food
Ireland Food
Nordic Union Food
Japan Food
Standardized Ramen Ration - thinly cut rice and wheat noodles 
Fish Patties - Extremely thin slices of fish, later mixed in with human flesh
Patagonia Food
Sun Tortilla - Tortilla made with wheat, corn, and beans
Australia and New Zealand Food
Toast with spread - the exact spread used varies from region to region, but it mainly consists of vegetables, fruits, and vitamins
Ethiopia Food
Injera - wheat flat bread served with whatever protein is at hand (human, cows, chickens, ect) 
GAR Food
Poland Food
East Germany Food
Staatesgenshek - Germanized borscht made with sugar beets, potatoes, and bits of bread
Mexico 
Eagle Tortilla - similar to Patagonia’s tortilla, except this one is made mainly from maize and is very crumbly 
Venezuela 
Victory Bread - cornbread made popular in the 80s due to government programs to deal with poverty 
Brazil 
Sao Paulo Soup - an ironically named government ration that is essential porridge made from oats, wheat, barley, rye, and potatoes 

-This interlude will be about the United Kingdom (and Ireland though much less in depth) from 1970-2027 and will cover most stuff about it. I (BritishSocDem) will write most of it but I would still appreciate anyone’s contributions or ideas for the lore, especially with 70s-90s culture (as I am shit on that). Section titles can also be renamed if you have better ideas bc I made them in a minute

icl rn lots of this has been retconned by 2-2 so I may work on it more later


Section 1 - Golden Years (1972-1989)
The economy, culture, politics of the United Kingdom in the Glorious Decades from 1972-1989 when Labour wins power 
-UK does not have economic crisis in 1970s, leading to Edward Heath winning re-election in 1974
-Economy is stagnating compared to others, Heath resigns and is replaced by Thatcherist figure, who calls snap election and wins in 1977
-Mass deregulation, privatisation occurs. Manufacturing collapses and the north is left abandoned, deepening north-south divide, basically Thatcher pro max
-NHS is partially privatised in 1986 and 87
-Further elections won in 1979, 1984, Conservative dominance
-Crash of 88 occurs, mass protests and rioting against austerity and NHS privatisation as horror stories get out
-Conservatives voted out in landslide, reduced to third place and replaced by Liberals, Labour win massive majority
-New Labour PM is economically left-wing, NATO- and Eurosceptic, socially moderate, similar to early 80s Labour 

Section 2 - Britannia Fallen (90s and 00s)
The United Kingdom, and by extension Ireland during the 1990s and 2000s. Includes conflict with the Federation, such as the 1997 Channel Crisis, the Red Summer of 2003 and its aftermath, and the trade war and blockade with the European Federation
-Labour reverses lots of what Conservatives did when in office, mainly privatisations. Deficit skyrockets however and they cannot fully fulfil their campaign promises, mainly on budget cuts
-Rationing introduced following 1990 Hot Summer
-Fiscal crisis occurs in 1991, the government was forced to make large budget cuts. Draw large protests but many grudgingly accept it
-As a member of the EU, the UK is a participant of the Brussels Conference, but Eurosceptic government rejects joining it
-Riots in Essex and other right-wing areas in 1993 take place over poverty and immigration. Many immigrants have been coming in since 1988, used to fill gaps in employment, and they have started to be used as a scapegoat by Far-right. BNP does well in local elections that year
-1994 election - Labour loses moderate amount of support but divided opposition mean they only lose a few seats
-Decline increases in 95 and 96 and unrest gets larger and larger. Labour cracks down on beginning rioting but this creates more backlash
-1997 Channel Crisis - 
-Disastrous flooding strikes London in 1999, Thames Barrier almost collapses. Upgrades are urgently built but everyone knows London will soon collapse

Section 3 - Years of Decay (10s and 20s)
The United Kingdom and to a lesser extent Ireland during the 2010s and 2020s. Includes the connection to it with the Federation, the 2014 Agreement (that basically makes it a puppet), and the 2024 British Revolution and following British Civil War

So, this is my take (Toggy “ThatOneGuy1337” Wonga) on the history of Ireland and the UK in this universe, trying to fill in the gaps for what BritishSocDem has already established 

Ireland 
In the 1970s, emigration to other, more “prosperous” states (like Europe and the UK) continue as in OTL
Ireland does not join the EU in this timeline, citing Irish Neutrality. However, they do participate economically. 
Inflation isn’t THAT bad in the 1970s, only becoming a problem in 1980
Ireland’s solution was to try to enact measures of austerity
Northern Ireland/the Troubles
Due to the more peaceful nature of the 70s and 80s, the Troubles are far less violent, but just as divisive. 
The 14 unarmed civilians are not killed on Bloody Sunday of 1972, instead they are held hostage and while injured and tortured, are not outright killed
Because of this, the UK government is a bit more open to negotiation with the rebels
This leads to an agreement in late 1972 where Northern Ireland is governed by two delegates: one from the UK and one from Ireland
This did not satisfy the most diehard members of either side, and in 1974, the truce is broken when a bomb is found in Stormont castle. No one is killed, but the UK uses this to suspend the treaty and implement direct force in Northern Ireland
Ireland responds by creating mass strikes, with the British soldiers sent to break up the strikes
US Presidential candidate Winston Morgan uses this a talking point for his campaign 
The UK fears this will spread a precedent and completely unravel the UK
In the later years, various bombings in places across Europe and the UK are carried out by Irish-aligned nationalists, with an estimated 200 dead and 15,000 wounded between 1968-1988
The Pope visits in 1975 to try to address the violence between catholics and protestants 
In 1981, sick of the perceived economic stagnation, a pro-trade, pro-eu and pro UK prime minister is elected in Ireland, and he signs the Shanghai Accords
This is seen as “selling out” to the UK, and causes violence to escalate in Northern Ireland
On May 1st, 1982, a massive bomb blows up the headquarters of several Irish businesses viewed as “collaborating” with the british 
This culminates in an official UN mission to negotiate a peace between Ireland, North Ireland, and London, with a series of talks taking place between 1983-1988. All can agree that a peaceful solution can be reached, though they disagree on how. 
Foreign investors in Ireland, and along with British money as a sort of peace offering, increases the standard of living of Ireland to be on par with the UK and the rest of Europe
The Irish Free state focuses on humanitarian aide during the troubles
A DMZ is set up along Northern Ireland in 1982, but is dismantled just a year later
In 1983, welfare reforms and tax cuts, along with immigration incentives, cause the Irish GDP to go up
Ireland makes money in the 1980s by exporting stuff like coal, copper, natural gas, metals, and food to europe 
After the Crash of 1988, trade deals with the UK fall through, leading to violence to pick up again. Most of the industry in the island of Ireland was concentrated in British-owned Northern Ireland, so the troubles sees a strange inverse - those in Northern Ireland, wanting to limp by with British welfare, try to remain a part of the UK, while those in Ireland want to “reunify with their northern cousins”. Nothing actually happens though, it’s just people shouting and arguing over foreign policy
This goes nowhere, and Ireland sees a massive drop in quality of life between 1988-1992. In 1992, a hardcore socialist is elected, and creates a massive welfare state with a focus on irish independence. They however, do not have the resources to take Northern Ireland, but they begin to covertly supply the PIRA 
In the 1990s, Ireland survives, but just barely. Sea walls are built in the 1990s and 2000s, but are targeted by nationalists. Famine is kept to a minimum, and the state officially is renamed to the Federal Socialist Republic of Ireland in 1997. 
A small faction within the Irish government, wanting to 

As a part of the Antarctic Resettlement Project, the Expeditioners brought with them their advanced automation technology, retrofitted to use coal power. These machines, while bulky, wholly eliminated the need for labor, at least for processing things. Crops would still need to be planted, of course, but once harvested the process of extracting nutrients (most food is processed to maximize nutritional value)
One of the reasons why Landlords were protected in the gun legislation of 2005 is because they wanted to still pretend they weren’t socialists. Mao had a campaign against Landlords so they wanted to protect them. 
People who live in cars are called “mobos” (automobile + hobo).
Former Activists during the Screaming Sixties are later called "Screamers”, although this applies less to bourgeois bohemians and more to those who still try to protest or even live in tiny hippie communes.
On NYC
Massive chemical spills in the hudson river have made it not only unsafe to drink, but unsafe to bathe in
Parts of NYC are walled off in “grids”, people in grids need to use checkpoints to go in between grids, the areas with President Holden are completely walled off
Other random things
After the FDA was abolished under Sweeney, many other laws and regulations were repealed, and under Jarret, it became an inversion: companies claimed that all the pollution was actually *helping* human health, somehow
On sonico: 
So sonico is a super stimulant made by the same guy who made bromista. It has the opposite effect: heightening senses, granting the user energy, and even the perception of time slow down. It also blocked the user’s pain receptors. However, this caused MASSIVE heart damage and usually resulted in cardiac arrest after prolonged usage
Counter culture movements in the 1980s and 1970s usually congregated in scrap yards


For the map

Much of northern Alaska was sunk below the sea during the Al-Nippon War of 2273
Alaska still claims the Yukon frontier as its own
Lakes in Northern Canada were merged during the Water Allocation Project of 2138
Nunarov gained independence from the Second Soviet Union in 2342
The New American Union is the closest thing to the USA in the 1960s
Yoosa ceded much of Greenland to Danish survivors in 2149
Quebec is still just as independent as it was 1000 years ago
The Great Lakes have all become one lake
Ruins of an ancient American base
Prairie disputed zone
USC continues to slip into fascism
Gained independence from USC in 2840
The latest claimant to the legacy of the USA
Surprisingly democratic for an empire
Investment from African nations is restoring the former South
The Sol Republic worships and fears the sun
Panama lost influence when much of Central America sunk during the flood of 2507
Rather developed for an island nation
Drug use has become ritualized for spiritual use
The ruins of Lima can still be seen poking out of the water
Split from the Andes in 2821
Considered to be the most unstable region in the world
A new Chile is trying to revive the old Alliance
Guinea’s water cycle is permanently damaged
Congo flooded when the Great Congo Dam was destroyed in 2436
Rhodesian fascism survives
UFX is set to begin ambitious restoration projects in 3005
The Horn of Africa still fights over water
The Red Sea has expanded
Mecca has turned into an advanced oasis of technology
All major abrahamic religions now jointly control the Levant 
Much of South Europe has been a treasure trove for technology
Many flood walls were destroyed in the Fourth German War of 2724
Eire is working with Xhosa to restore their isles
Iceland hasn’t been habitable since 2014
Denmark stubbornly clings to their islands
Sweden fought for their independence in 2196. They failed
Norway is trying to fight the expanding North Sea swamp
Poland’s war against the ancient USSR was successful
Germany is still 9 countries in a trench coat
The ruins of Moscow were utterly destroyed during WW3 in 2027
Rather democratic and capitalistic
The latest claimant to the USSR’s legacy
The Siberian Reclamation Project is aiming to start in 3001
The Great Asian Dustbowl used to be almost 15 times bigger
Peaceful and pacifist
Death cults still roam the Indian waste
Bangladesh hasn’t existed since 2211
China was wiped out from the Great Death of 2027-2035, now resettled by other Asians
Indonesia is now a giant wet-bulb zone
Due to radiation and pollution, most people are born albino here
Humanitarian outpost operated by New Japan
Japan invaded Kamchatcha during WW3
New Zealand occupied North Australia after the second ANZ War
Plagued by violent anglo-nationalists
Completed destroyed by ancient China in 2027

For the Obituaries, BritishSocDem had the idea of showing a brief history of the nation in question from 1972 (the first major PoD, when the Shanghai Accords were signed) and the Great Death of 2027. In general, most nations follow a period of economic liberalism with right-wing politics, and then swap to a left-wing, planned economy with the closest thing the country can get to a welfare state. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_sovereign_states_in_the_1970s 

Chenk to my document: Food, Inc scenario
If anyone has ideas for expanding on the nations already planned or nations yet to be planned write them below.

Info Template: 
(Flag, scaled with a vignette based on if the nation collapsed in 1988, the 90s, the 00s, the 10s, the 20s, the Great Death, and no vignette if they survived) 
1988: Black and White, no vignette
1989-1999: 30% saturation
2000-2009: 45% saturation
2010-2019: 60% saturation
2020-2027: 75% saturation
2028-2035: 90% saturation
Official name: (Name as of 1988, and any name they change to)
Capital: (Capitol as of 1988 and any capitol they change to. Ex: the USA’s capital is moved to New York City after the invasion of Canada)
Government Type: (As of 1988, and whatever type they change to)
Population as of final census conducted: (As of the last time the government fully controlled all their territory)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: (Use this list and use the percentage of the population out of 12 billion. Ex: Mexico’s population is 1.6% of the world’s population, 1.6% of 12 Billion is 192,000,000. Add a few million here or there to make up for the massive depopulation in places like India)
GDP as of June 7, 1988: (Use this list and change around a few numbers so the billions are trillions and millions are billions. Ex: Zimbabwe’s GDP is $7.815 Billion USD)
Primary Language: (Self Explanatory)
Member of the Alliance of Nations: (If they choose to become a part of the new international community)
Alignment: (Which of the Big Four they are closest to. Alliance of Industrial Nations: USA, Mediterranean Economic Alliance: Europe, COMECON: USSR, World Prosperity Organization: China)
Great Death Survival Rating: (Out of Forgotten, Partial and Remnant)


United Arab Emirates: 

Afghanistan: 

Albania: 

Algeria:

Andorra: 

Angola: 

Antigua:

Argentina: 

Australia: 

Austria: 

Bahamas: 

Bahrain:

Bangladesh: 

Barbados: 

Belgium: Up to you

Bhutan: 

Bolivia: 

Botswana: 

Brazil: 

Bulgaria:

Burma/Myanmar: 

Burundi: 

Cambodia: 

Cameroon: 

Canada: 

Cape Verde: 

Central African Republic: 

Ceylon/Sri Lanka: 

Chad: 

Chile: 

Colombia:

Comoros: 
Official name: Union of the Comoros (until 2006), State of Comoros (until 2014)
Capital: Moroni (until 2006), Hitlershaven (renamed from Dzaoudzi in 2006, until 2014)
Government Type: Unitary presidential republic (de jure until 1993), Mercenary-ruled state (until 2014)
Population as of final census conducted: 917,231 (1991)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 91,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $781 million
Primary Languages: Comorian, French, Afrikaans
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment: None
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Comoros had just been independent in 1974 after the French gave them independence (which was more given than OTL, OTL the Comorians unilaterally declared independence in 1975). However, this independence came at a cost. Mayotte remained under French rule as they didn’t want to join the rest of Comoros. Mayotte however, was home to a French-South African mercenaries group, ready to ensure the rest of Comoros remained under French control unofficially.

Comoros soon became a cheap plantation source for many crops such as vanilla, cinnamon, and others. Soon, Comoros also became the world’s biggest exporter of the plant ylang-ylang for perfumes. However, the people of Comoros weren’t fully feeling the supposed benefits that came from it. Sure, the government made sure to provide basic needs such as housing, food, healthcare, and others. However, most of the money remained within the elites of the nation and the mercenaries. The common Comorians never fully tasted that money.

From their independence to the crash of 1988, Comoros had experienced at least 4 attempted rebellions or coups. All of those were brutally squashed by the puppet military and the mercenaries. Still, life went on.

That was until the Crash of 1988.

At first, Comoros didn’t feel the straight effects from the crash. However, soon the exports began drying out. No one needed perfumes after the Crash. Spices were still exported, however they were less and less valuable over time. Food supply though, was getting lower. All of the abandoned plantations were quickly repurposed into farms for the people. However, overfarming led to decrease in quantity and quality. While it hadn’t reached emergency level yet, everyone began to worry about the future.

In 1993, the President of Comoros was shot dead by one of the military generals in a coup. This was the most successful coup so far with the general rallying the population against the foreigners. However, he miscalculated the mercenaries in the neighboring Mayotte. He thought they would abandon Comoros just like that. Big mistake.

Just a week after, the general was hanged in the capital alongside his circle. The coup was squashed. Mercenaries roamed the countryside to kill every single rebel or suspected rebels they could find. And it got worse.

The mercenaries now decided they didn’t need a puppet government. Comoros belonged to them now. Many of the former government and elites were purged of the suspected rebel alignment or any sign of discontent against the mercenaries. Comoros was now under the rule of foreigners again.

The mercenaries quickly established an authoritarian order. Strict rationing was implemented though the best food was clearly preserved for the mercenaries. Opulent houses were built out of the backs of the natives. Plantations were reopened though not to the degree of the Glorious Decades to export their crops to South Africa, the only nation willingly buying them. South Africa provided more aid for the mercenaries as they felt the mercenaries to be good rulers.

The French however gradually retreated from the Comoros. In December 1998, despite many pleas from Mayotte to Paris, Mayotte was officially united with Comoros and Paris officially pulled out of Comoros. The people of Mayotte however fared somewhat better than the rest of Comoros with the stable-ish transition. Plantations were kept open, but Mayotte fared looser rule under the mercenaries.

Eventually though, the mercenaries were increasingly seen as unwelcome by all of Comoros. Food was getting harder to get. Fishermen were increasingly returning with empty holds. And with the mercenaries hoarding all the food for themselves, resentment was building.

From 1998, a total of 8 attempted rebellions were squashed by the mercenaries. All of the rebels and suspected rebels were hanged in the fields and the towns. The mercenaries didn’t spare any mercy to those they suspected. Eventually, however, the mercenaries couldn’t hold the islands forever. Their weapons and ammunition were running low. The people were getting harder to control. Mass executions only made the dead martyrs instead of pacifying the islands.

In 2006, things finally changed. A major storm was predicted to hit the islands. Colonel Rand, the leader of the mercenaries finally decided to evacuate the islands to save themselves. On 12 December 2006, the storm hit, killing thousands of Comorians. However, when it passed on 14 December, they were free. Despite the harrowing destruction, the Comorians were finally free from the mercenaries. The mood was so jubilant despite them having to remove the ruins after the storm. A new government was soon declared on the Dzaoudouzi of Mayotte. The Comorians were set on establishing a new government for themselves.

They celebrated too soon.

On 18 December, a new group landed on the shores of Comoros. When they found out about the supposedly new government, they immediately opened fire on every single Comorians they could find. Within 2 days, the entire new government was executed. Within a week, the islands were properly pacified once more. At least 67,000 were killed during the pacification, roughly 6% of the estimated population.

The darkest time had come into Comoros. The previous mercenaries at least were merely kleptocratic, caring more about food and money rather than themselves. The new ones were worse.

Colonel Rand of the previous mercenary didn’t return to the Comoros after evacuating. Rumours said he was executed in the mainland for not properly pacifying the “inferior blacks”. Instead, someone who was merely called the General came to rule over the islands. The General was someone who fully believed in the ideology of the newly renamed GAR in South Africa.

Within months, Dzaoudzi was cleared of “unnecessary” natives. Those that remained were essentially slaves for the mercenaries. Dzaoudzi was renamed into Hitlershaven since the General felt such an “African” name didn’t fit for their new home. They also fully removed the veneer and simply renamed Comoros as the State of Comoros. The displaced were the first group to be put into newly-reopened slave plantations. Conditions were horrid to say the least. While the first mercenaries tried to provide food by strict rationing and healthcare, the new ones totally didn’t. They must look for their own food, not even planting them. Any unauthorized crop was punished with death. Any unauthorized fishing was punished with death.

Needless to say, scores of Comorians quickly died out within months of their reign. At least 25% of the population died within the first year of their rule. To replace them, the mercenaries imported thousands of foreign Africans from the mainland and Madagascar. The Comorians were increasingly becoming less of a majority in their own lands. Comoros had regressed into the times of Spanish Hispaniola, this time with Nazism and Afrikaner racism.

Any attempted riot or rebellion were punished with death. The mercenaries didn’t even bother at sorting between the innocent or guilty. Even children as young as 8 years old were put into plantations.

Eventually, it deteriorated enough in the 2010s or so when reports of cannibalisms began to emerge. The enslaved population began to eat on their sickly and old ones. First it was voluntary, but more and more were committed  out of desperation.

And what were the mercenaries' reactions ? Laughing at the Africans’ faces. They felt it was only proper that the inferiors ate their own and the Master Race ate real food. They even executed more to provide more food to the slaves.

Despite this draconian condition, it was getting harder to justify continued occupation of the islands. More and more of the goods imported weren’t of enough quality and then quantity. There were talks of abandoning the islands to their fate.

And it happened in November 2014. A major storm once again was tracked to hit the Comoros. The mercenaries had decided to pull out, abandoning the islands completely. Coincidentally, Comoros had just received more imported workers from the mainland just a week earlier.

The storm hit on 28 November 2014. Hitlershaven alongside every other settlement and plantations in Comoros were destroyed. Every boat remaining was sunk. There wasn’t any building left standing or undamaged by the storm.

When the storm settled, conflict began to break out between what remained of the former slaves. Some tried to build boats or anything to escape the islands. However, the depleted resources made those attempts very important. A civil war broke out in the islands. Within months, the majority of Comoros either died or escaped by improvised boats, many dying in the sea as well.

By 2027, Comoros was just a shell of itself. Less than 100 thousand remained in the ruined islands. Only about 10% of them were native Comorians. They were completely abandoned to their fate.

DRC/Zaire: 

Republic of the Congo:

Cook Islands:

Costa Rica: 

Cuba: 

Cyprus: 

Czechoslovakia: 

Benin:

Denmark:

Djibouti: 

Dominica: 

Ecuador: 

Egypt: 

El Salvador:

Equatorial Guinea:
Official name: Republic of Equatorial Guinea
Capital: Malabo (until 2012)
Government Type: United presidential republic (de jure until 2012), Totalitarian dictatorship (de facto until 2012)
Population as of final census conducted: 1,4 million (estimated, 1990s)
Estimated Population as of June 14, 2027: 173,000
GDP as of June 7, 1988: $561 million
Primary Languages: Spanish (until 1993), French (until 1993), Portuguese (until 1993), Fang, etc
Member of the Alliance of Nations: NO
Alignment:  Mediterranean Economic Alliance (until 1993)
Great Death Survival Rating: Forgotten

Equatorial Guinea weren’t exactly receiving the bountiful effects of the Glorious Decades. The dictatorial rule under Francisco Nguema wasn’t exactly the most positive time during Equatorial Guinea’s time of existence. Despite Moscow, Beijing, and Madrid forcing Nguema to be somewhat mellower, Equatorial Guinea didn’t feel the elevated prosperity during the time. 

Instead, many of its population were exploited heavily for its cocoa, coffee, and timber. Various corporations from Europe and America opened up shops as the population was used to plant those crops. Overfarming began to show its effect even before just the Crash of 1988. During the time, Nguema would deliberately use non-Fang tribesmen such as the Bubi people in the island of Santa Isabel to grow the crops. It was said Santa Isabel was cleared of Bubi people in the 1980s or 1990s.

After the Crash of 1988, Equatorial Guinea initially didn’t receive heavy impacts from it as its oil deposit were heavily exploited, replacing the drying plantations' incomes. Luxurious mansions and such were built for Nguema and his inner circle in Santa Isabel and the mainland. However, Malabo was increasingly becoming a city only for Nguema and his inner circle. Its population was basically serfs for them.

With that money, Equatorial Guinea barely weathered the Hot Summer. Despite this, many of its people starved to death, notably non-Fang people. Droves of Bubi and other tribes died due to starvation while the Fang people barely survived.

However, when the oil finally dried out in 1993, Nguema finally returned to his horrible self. Every single Westerner was expelled. Any of those who remained were killed in 1995. Many Equatoguineans closely associated with Westerners during the Glorious Decades were arrested. Many were killed by the end of 1990s. His prisons were so overfilled by prisoners some were executed daily to reduce the space.

Spanish and other Western languages were outlawed in 1993. Any book written in those languages were banned too and those who owned them might simply disappear if they didn’t dispose of them in time.

Cuba aided Equatorial Guinea briefly during the 1990s. However, they pulled out with the insane excesses of Nguema’s dictatorship. They were horrified by the insane dictatorship and pulled out every single personnel to save them. It’s rumoured they even brought some very desperate refugees from Equatorial Guinea.

The Catholic Church faced heavy restriction in the Glorious Decades. All of its priests were bugged and told to praise Nguema in every mass. Eventually, they were banned in 1995. All of its priests were sent to prisons in 1996. By 2000, the Catholic Church rankings in Equatorial Guinea were extinct.

To replace the Cubans, Nguema brought in mercenaries from across Africa. They, alongside Nguema’s inner circle members, would rule over Equatorial Guinea as it was breaking down. The purges against the military and government would see mercenaries taking place as governors and armed forces leaders in some places in Equatorial Guinea.

Despite this, Nguema was increasingly getting paranoid. He felt the Spanish, the Cubans, the French, and others were coming for him. He became increasingly isolated in his mansion in the island of Bioko, abandoning the capital in 1998 to his mansion.

Order was breaking down in Equatorial Guinea as people were starving. Many of the government apparatuses were gone. Mercenaries were killing people with impunity. Even simple felonies such as crashing into a mercenary could get you shot.

Nguema began to lose trust in his inner circle and family too. In August 1999, he executed the entire line of his brother including Obiang, his nephew. Their bodies were fed upon the starving population of Malabo. Many of his ministers and others were executed too for no clear reason other than Nguema’s paranoia. They were also turned into food for the population.

In the mainland, farms began to fail after overcropping. Food supply began to run low. Fishes were getting harder to catch. It was as if the end was approaching near for Equatorial Guinea.

Then, it happened. Nguema died.

In June 2000, Nguema was reportedly visiting the prisoners in his personal jail in his mansion. This was a known habit of his, visiting, berating, torturing, and executing prisoners. This time, he was accompanied by his daughter, Monica Macias. She was one of his closest and most loyal confidants. However, after an unspecified psychotic break, he reportedly picked up an AK-47 and fired upon the entire jail, dumping its magazines to kill every single prisoner there.

After the massacre was over, Nguema was reportedly grinning, heavily disturbing Monica. 

It was unclear what happened next. However, it was reported Monica then suddenly shot Nguema. Soon after that, he bled out. Nguema had died ingloriously.

What came next might actually be worse for Equatorial Guinea.

Monica quickly gathered her wits. Within a week, her family was put to death. Her mother, her siblings, and the rest of her father’s family. All were purged. Similarly, every single governor and top mercenary leaders were purged to prevent any of her father’s aligned faction against her.

Anyone left was just a yes-man to her rule. Monica had assumed total control by August 2000.

For a brief period, things were actually getting somewhat better for Equatoguineans. Order was re-established. Strict rationing was implemented. Farms were reopened. Security was established. However, things were not so free there. Anyone could easily be imprisoned for a simple matter. The prisons were still cauldrons of crimes against humanity. Monica had simply put a little order to the collapsing nation.

And it was about to get worse.

Even with strict order, farms were still failing. Crops failed to grow. Heavy rains and floods washed settlements and farms away. Fishes were getting harder and harder to catch. Even substance gathering began to dry out.

Here, Monica was about to turn even more horrifying than her father.

Every Bubi people ranging from 50 years above were gathered and killed. They were turned into food for the people. And then 40 years. And then the rest. Finally all of them were gone.

Other groups faced similar treatment. Any enemies of Monica were turned into food. Prisoners were turned into food. Anyone who disagreed was turned into food. By 2008, any intellectuals other than the most trusted were turned into food. Any possession of things indicating one as intellectual was punished by death. No one else was smarter than Monica. No one.

Monica was as paranoid, if not more, as her father was. No one knew exactly why Monica turned this way. However, one of the last surviving bodyguards (he was purged in 2011) told stories of the time Monica killed Nguema. It was said Nguema cursed her to suffer forever. She shall not find any peace in life, Nguema said before he was dead.

Any rebellions were quickly squashed and the rebels were turned into food. Any dissenting voice was gone. The mercenaries were similarly turning into psychos themselves. Equatorial Guinea was literally run by madmen now.

In 2012, it all would end. Malabo and the island of Bioko received an unusually heavy amount of rain. The storm threatened to destroy and wipe out the entire island. Facing this, Monica and what’s left of her inner circle evacuated the island, leaving the rest to die. However, their ship capsized in the ocean, leaving their fate unclear.

It was said Monica actually survived the capsizing and washed ashore. The people, for one last time, rose up, and brutally butchered her. Nothing was left of her by the time they were done. Nothing could be confirmed. The mainland fell into fiefdoms of psychotic mercenary warlords who ruled over the starving, decimated people. Eventually, all of them would fall either by uprisings or internal schisms, replaced by total anarchy. 

The island of Bioko was abandoned, Malabo became a graveyard as a remainder of both of the Nguemas’ rule. What’s left of the survivors either killed themselves, killed others before killing themselves, or went away by boats, surviving or not.

By 2027, Equatorial Guinea as a nation was no more. Its people were scattered and decimated by the rules of the Nguemas and the mercenaries after them. 

Ethiopia: 

Fiji:

Finland: 

France: 

Gabon:

The Gambia: 

Germany, East: 

Germany, West: 

Ghana: 

Greece: 

Grenada: 

Guatemala: 

Guinea: 

Guinea-Bissau: 

Guyana:

Haiti: 

Holy See:

Honduras: 

Hungary: 

Iceland:

India: 

Indonesia:

Iran:

Ireland: 

Israel: 

Italy: 

Ivory Coast:

Jamaica: 

Japan:

Jordan:

Kenya:

Kiribati: 

Korea, North:

Korea, South:

Kuwait:

Laos:

Lebanon:

Lesotho: 

Liberia:

Libya:

Liechtenstein:

Luxembourg:

Madagascar: 

Malawi:

Malaysia: 

Maldives: 

Mali:

Malta: 

Mauritania: 

Mauritius: 

Mexico: 

Monaco: 

Mongolia: 

Morocco: 

Mozambique: 

Oman: 

Nauru: 

Nepal: 

Netherlands: 

New Zealand: 

Nicaragua: 

Niger: 

Nigeria: 

Niue: 

Norway:

Pakistan:

Panama: 

Papua New Guinea: 

Paraguay: 

Peru: 

Philippines: 

Polish People’s Republic : Gierek era continues as the West, not strapped for cash due to no Oil Crisis, keeps tossing him cash so he can keep building shit. He probably retires in the mid 1980s (in glory, seen by Warsaw Pact as a visionary for having adopted proto-market socialism before the rest) and is replaced by a semi competent underling (perhaps Kania?), who in turn is replaced by a Junta similar to OTL in 1988 after the economy collapses and the West demands their cash back - after refusal they cut ties and the Warsaw Pact’s economies flatline. Tons of dissidence but unorganized (due to higher prosperity Solidarity never exists), Far Right starts gaining traction. The Soviets initially try to help but give up after Turkestan turns into the water hazard level from HL2. By 2000, the Warsaw Pact basically dosen’t exist, with only the old Soviet Bloc, Yugoslavia, Turkey and Scandinavia holding on (with a ,,hang together or be hung separately” mentality). Poland’s regime collapses in the late 2000s as the economy completely collapses and the peasantry riots, replaced by Far Right Regime (Maybe led by Marian Kowalski? Decently popular as bodybuilder in OTL, had monetary backup, unlikely to be butterflied - prob. Richer thanks to the opening up in the 1980s). The rest goes along with this, not wanting to waste valuable resources on basically couping the country. Poland turns from a Communist Regime into a Corporatocracy, although one where people are given some welfare (at the insistence of the Catholic Church, and because the Polish Right was always held up by the conservative poor who like to not starve). The Polish Intelligence Service figures out the USSR is doing shady shit (in the leadup to the Great Death) but lack the ability to properly analize what exactly. Poland leads the People’s Coalition (still holding on by 2027, and actually headquartered in the city instead of Moscow) to intervene in the European Civil War to help East Germany loot umm i mean reclaim the rest of the country, and most of their army is abroad when the Nukes hit.

Portugal: 

Qatar: 

Romania: 

Rwanda: 

Saint Christopher-Nevis-Anguilla: 

Saint Lucia: 

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines: 

San Marino: 

São Tomé and Príncipe: 

Saudi Arabia: 

Senegal: 

Seychelles: 

Sierra Leone: 

Singapore: 

Solomon Islands: 

Somalia: 

South Africa: 

USSR: 

Spain: 

Sudan: 

Suriname: 

Swaziland: 

Sweden: 

Switzerland: 

Syria: 

Tanzania: 

Thailand: 

Togo: 

Tonga: 

Trinidad: 

Tunisia: 

Tuvalu: 

Uganda: 

UK: 

USA: 

Upper Volta: 

Uruguay: 

Venezuela: 

Vietnam, North: 

Vietnam, South: 

Western Samoa: 

Yemen, North: 

Yemen, South: 

Yugoslavia: 

Zambia: 

Icarus! The closest thing to Soylent Green but without the creator being a nazi 
Icarus: A Climate TL | alternatehistory.com 

Make Room! Make Room! By Harry Harrison, the original inspiration to soylent Green
Harry Harrison - Novel 02 - Make Room! Make Room! (retail).pdf 

Parable of the Sower by Octavia Butler, perhaps the most realistic dystopia of all time
[1 of 5] Parable of the Sower, Chapters 1-6, Octavia E. Butler (1993) - NowComment 

Parable of the Talents by Octavia Butler, an alarmingly prophetic book
Parable of the Talents -- Butler, Octavia E.pdf 

The Wanting Seed by Anthony Burgess, think 1984 + Soylent Green
The Wanting Seed 

Tender is the Flesh by Agustina Bazterrica, though in this novel the cannibalism is a much more overt metaphor for exploitation 
Tender Is the Flesh - Wikipedia 

The Road by Cormac McCarthy, a good exploration of a realistic apocalypse. Could be good for the more anarchic areas
The Road By Cormac McCarthy This book is dedicated to JOHN FRANCIS MCCARTHY When he woke in the woods in the dark and the cold o 

B_Munro’s original Soylent Green worldbuilding piece, which inspired Treskow to make his timeline
Ration Omega, 2022 by QuantumBranching on DeviantArt 

The original August 10, 1972 script to Soylent Green
Food, Inc-green-1973.pdf 

Name Generator
American Name Generator 

For simplicity, I’ve listed their modern 2025 names/equivalents for easier research 

Basically No Lore:
Some lore: 

No Glorious Decades lore:
Andorra (Prospers during the Glorious Decades, with its Tourism industry appealing to the small but not insignificant section of poor people who have enough time and money to spare on foreign vacations but can’t afford Supersonic Jets to exotic destinations - or are simply too afraid to fly them, for whatever reason. Either way, it flourishes, with every inch of the duchy covered in cement hotels and shopping malls. In the mid 1980s there’s a small dip in economic growth after climate change made the Winter Sports far, far more expensive and difficult to host, but a bit of aid from the French and claims from ,,Experts” that this is nothing but a hiccup from Mother Nature restored confidence. After the 1988 Crash it kept afloat until 1989, mostly burning through their massive savings to try and keep the lights on in all of their massive buildings, but after it was clear the snow wasn’t coming back they had to seek bailouts from France or Spain. The French, already smelling rot and suspecting this crisis wouldn’t be over anytime soon, said no, and so the Spanish offered to simply annex the Duchy and take care of basic utilities in exchange for some… favours. The local authorities agreed, and before long the once splendorous Hotels and massive stadiums were turned into refugee centers. Ironically Andorra is one of the better places to be in Europe, with somewhat livable temperatures and a healthy economy based on shipping away their youth (who, unlike their counterparts elsewhere in Europe, don’t look like gaunt walking corpses) to work on projects too physically demanding for their peers. Obviously not shown on maps past 1990. )
Austria (the Socialists and the People’s Party both drift toward Free Market Economics, and even begin to overlap when it comes to some Social Affairs, mostly approaching the center on things like Women’s Rights. The Freedom Party fizzles out after many of their members are outed as various types of criminals, with many surviving members quitting politics and instead going into business. Unemployment and Inflation reach new lows, even if it’s not quite as impressive as in other European States, and the average citizen enjoys prosperity comparable to the below-average American. In the late 80s, though, it went on track even more, as rising trade with other European States meant more jobs and higher pay, and the 1987 Government even brought back some of the Welfare abolished at the start of the 70s. Kurt Waldheim’s War Service is never revealed, and the successes of his Presidency mean he is rather fondly remembered, and a statue of him was even planned in the City center of Vienna before the Red Decades put an end to that.)
Belgium (With no oil crises, Belgium doesn't do much to limit their welfare state - some bits are slashed here or there, but most are reinstated at some point in the early 1980s. Federalization went forward in the 1970s but stagnated in the 1980s, with no 1980 Constitutional Reform. A referendum is held to abolish the monarchy in response, but fails to reach the required turnout threshold, and even then only about 30% vote in favor. While the vast majority of the country focuses on cultural expansion, a small drought in Wallonia in 1985 ends up destroying its flower harvesting sector, with the now unemployed farmers mostly moving to Brussels to work menial jobs on the newly established Financial Industries. In 1988, the newly inaugurated Prime Minister is thinking about opening up specialized industries for various kick knacks to bring back jobs from China, but has stated, several times, this is merely a fallback measure in case something were to happen and not ,,a sign of hostility toward the people of China” (Chen actually sends a letter in response, which pretty much amounts to ,,no offense taken, but if you do go forward with it, have you considered hiring Chinese Construction conglomerates?”). Still, it is met with a rather fair bit of ridicule - what could possibly happen to justify such tomfoolery?)
Cyprus (the 1974 Coup and subsequent Turkish invasion still happen but the British pressure America and China to intervene. Under threat of having their development aid cut, alongside China subtly implying they could flood the Turko-Kurdish Far Left with guns if they wanted to, both Governments come to the negotiating table and agree to recognize an independent, united and heavily decentralized Cyprus. The country’s democracy is corrupt and flawed, with much of the newfound tourism revenue going directly into the pockets of the elite, but enough trickles down to keep the ,,proles” at bay. In the 1980s, in a bid to try and actually show the people they’re doing something, the Government funded a net of universities, mostly bilingual ones, that created a rather large class of intellectuals in the country. 1987 actually sees the Duopoly (consisting of an economically and socially centrist Greek-dominated party and a socially conservative free market Turkish dominated party) challenged as the Working People’s Party is revived, this time as a Social Democratic movement instead of an openly Marxist one, and the 1988 Elections see their candidate almost win but eventually be defeated when the Greeks (who didn’t make it into the 2nd round) throw their weight behind the Turk, who is eventually elected by a narrow margin with many irregularities reported. That said, for the most part, it’s rather prosperous.)
Denmark (in 1973, Venstre goes all in on the Free Market and forms a Coalition Government with a somewhat larger but still razor thin plurality. The Danish Communist Party gets somewhat larger thanks to Soviet aid, but not too much. In 1975, Venstre was replaced by the deceptively named Progress Party as the main backbone of the Right Wing Government, while the socially liberal Social Liberal Party was kicked out. Mass urban renewal projects end with Copenhagen rapidly growing, with the poor de facto expelled to large ,slum cities” made specifically for them in a new form of urban segregation. Of course, those soon become festering sores on the countryside, sources of crime and poverty, but in the early 1980s the Government did invest more than a bit of cash into trying to ensure they’re at least somewhat livable. The Middle Class is also taxed out of the Major Cities and forced to live in their own areas, but those are more akin to a classic suburbia (with all the good and the bad that brings) than the Purge-esque shitfest that sometimes goes on in the slums. The Government tries to crack down on immigration but the other nations are very much against that and threaten sanctions, so they relent and let the poor from abroad flood in, further making the slums completely shit to live in. Wind Energy is shut down at the request of Big Coal, which soon opens up power plants in the slums to fuel all of the Elite’s electrical chicanery (like a massive sign reading ,,COPENHAGEN” on a hill near… well, Copenhagen, lit 24/7). By 1988, though, the Social Democrats were starting to rebound - in 1987’s Elections, for the first time since 1975, the Right Coalition ruled by plurality as opposed to by majority. The economy was also starting to stagnate.)
Finland (The Presidency remains powerful. The boom of the 1970s still happens as the country transitions to a mostly service based economy. Instead of spending money on welfare, the Finns focus it on research, and while Technology in the computer sector does stagnate they make a pretty buck selling revolutionary, if impractical, breakthroughs to the major powers’ elites. Debt continues rising as they keep taking loans to expand the sector and fund start ups, with Lapland becoming known as the ,,Land of Santa Claus and Enterprenourialism”. In 1985, a Free Trade Zone was created between Finland and the Estonian SSR. Some strike waves happen as the traditional industrial sectors decline, but the USSR negotiates an end to them as instead, the woods of the north are chopped down into near non-existence and sent to China to be turned into chairs and kitschy furniture. After the crash of 1988, the Finnish economy plummeted, the National Coalition Government that had been in charge since 1970, held on all the way until 1991, refusing to hold a snap election. The Social Democrats achieved a majority, with the People’s Democratic League (a bunch of USSR Sockpuppets united into one) in a close second place, the Greens and Centrists (Agrarians) tied for a very distant third and the Coalition not electing a single MP. The newly chosen Prime Minister pretty much ruled by decree, instituting what amounted to a centrally planned economy to try and salvage the situation while outright overriding the authority of a few municipal governments in favor of pro Government unions. He also institutes heavy rationing and uses the deforested North for farming, even if it’s horribly inefficient due to the shit climate and lack of proper equipment. The Communists are banned again in the lead-up to the 1995 Parliamentary Elections, as the PM fears they could potentially gridlock the legislature or even gain a majority of their own. He kept on ruling until the 1997 Soviet Invasion, in which he was killed in a decapitation strike. The country surrendered in 1999 and became another SSR.)
France (French Guyana is modernized. Rapidly deindustrializes as companies flee abroad, mostly into China, Africa and (by far the least) South America. Paris sees some Urban renewal, with large Operas and Libraries created, but skyscrapers are moved outward after a large under construction one (created for an India-based accounting firm) crumbles into the metro and catacombs due to there being too little ground to support it, in 1979. De Gaulle’s legacy remains firm, with many French Companies making a point to name at least one area in every foreign factory after him (ranging from entire Factory Complexes to the De Gaulle Security Office, the De Gaulle Break Room and, who could forget, the De Gaulle Female Bathroom (in a SIZ making Soda Cans in China) - although that last one was shut down pretty quickly). Supermarkets remain open on Sundays, and sometimes become 24/7 businesses. Terrorism is pretty much nonexistent with the large-scale prosperity, and the near universal nature of entertainment begins to wear down on local culture [based on what happened in OTL Poland, with Universal TV making local dialects fade into near non-existence]. The Bretons try to form terrorist cells but are disorganized and eventually easily destroyed by Augusto Fernando César in 1981. Speaking of 1981, during the 1970s the Socialists crumble into smaller parties, most of which either fade into irrelevancy (including one Trotskyist one which is busted by César after their Boss is revealed to have had a Supervillain-esque, stupid-ass plan to blow up the Versailles Palace while the Prime Minister was visiting) or are taken over by the Communists. In the 1981 French Presidential Election, the incumbent Republican Party (the name of the Rally for the Republic ITTL) Gaulist President is re-elected with 66% of the vote, with the main opposition coming from the Communist Richard Pascal (Shipyard Union Boss, City Councilman in Brest and brother of the future President, serving as Minister of Transport from 1990 to 1995 and Minister of the Interior from 1996 to 1997) getting 21%, 10% going to the “Liberal” (Centre-Right) Democratic Party (TTL’s Union for French Democracy) Nominee (A Businessman in the telecommunications industry and former Senator) and 3% to everyone else combined . The 1980s saw yet another wave of deregulation and decentralization. In the 1986 Legislative Elections, the Communists chipped away at the Republican Majority but still remained in the opposition, slowly but surely expanding their reach among the Middle-Class Youths and disgruntled former ,,Screamers” (people who were active during the ,,Screaming Sixties”) under the rule of the Pascal Brothers (although Richard steadily let his brother do the heavy lifting)
West Germany (One of the few countries to keep some industry, although mostly related to technological start ups - it’s not quite as attractive as Finland but still has its uses, with a ton of educated youths to serve as the backbone of such business. The RAF and other Far Left terrorist groups are pacified after an attempted attack on several Bundestag Members visiting a Tech Start-up, trying to ,,show their strength to the bourgeois scumbags”. The only victim is Helmut Kohl, who gets a small statue built of him in his hometown of Ludwigshafen. This is where Augusto Fernando César gets his start, coordinating the West German Police and Special Forces, being awarded the order of merit in 1978 for his efforts. Ostpolitik goes forward, with large-scale trade ties set up between the Bundsrepublik and Poland (and later the USSR, too). DDR-BRD Relations remain cold, for the most part. Fultec is set up here (already explained), alongside other tech companies. The Greens never catch on, and counter-culture fails outside of West Berlin (which remains flourishing, especially thanks to liberal folks fleeing from the socially conservative Communist Bloc). Ruled by the Social Democrats (SPD) as of 1988.)
Iceland (Still wins the Cod Wars, and overfishes the North just to rub salt into Britain’s wound - although a few stern words from the USA, suggesting that a Police Junta would rule just as well as the democratically elected Parliament, get them to enact a few token limits on fishing. With no oil shock, the Economy keeps booming. Other than that, not much of a change from OTL).
Ireland (the Banks continue quickly growing, lending money to anyone who wants to take the cash. With American Advisors and “Advisors” by their side, the Irish learned to manage their economy properly and boom in the 1980s, with every type of economic sector booming. Even Industry remains afloat thanks to the amount of cash the Elite is willing to dump for the sake of keeping the poor happy and employed. Several high rises are erected in Dublin, housing some of the largest companies in Europe. Fianna Fail and Fine Gael keep exchanging power between 1973 and 1988, although cracks are already starting to show as Inflation surpasses 10% right before the Sinai War. After the crash, the economy crumbles, and the 1989 Snap Election results in a Labour majority in coalition with the Greens and a few splitters from the Workers’ Party (Sinn Fein, SF). Ireland is hit hard by the climate crisis, but not too hard, and rationing only goes into effect in the mid 1990s. Unemployment is a bigger issue, and even with massive spending, the Government proves unable to fix stuff. Labour’s majority melted in 1993, but they remain in power thanks to their Green coalition partners siphoning much of that vote. They would turn sharply leftward as a result, instituting the usual planned economy stuff, even if they do keep a few companies pretty much as they were before, with only token changes to staff and leadership positions (if that). With the situation ever so slightly stabilized, the 1997 Election once more gives Labour a large majority to work with, but they keep the Greens just in case. As negotiations continue with the UK in regards to northern Ireland, the nationalists come out to vote and give Labour another 4 years in office, this time letting them rule on their own without the need for coalition partners. The Greens and Sinn Fein form the Irish People’s Coalition in opposition to the ,,managerialization of Left Wing Politics”. In 2003, Ireland would become a founding member of the North European Free Trade Area, but didn’t get too much out of it compared to the others. After protests regarding the 2005 Elections, Labour would go out and ban the People’s Coalition, pretty much becoming an European puppet state (even if one that received a fair bit of leeway in how it did stuff). As expected, Labour would be re-elected, with only half a dozen independents forming a motley ,loyal opposition”. In 2009 a Potato Blight strikes, but European “humanitarian aid” steps in and stops the worst of the starvation (by reducing the amount of mouths to feed). The country mostly remains the same - a de facto one party state under the increasingly authoritarian Labour Party - until the late 2020s when, in light of Europe having been weakened, they begin a thaw and slowly loosen up restrictions. Shown on all existing maps by 2027.
Italy (Rapid investment plans in the South, alongside the Shanghai Accords ensuring cheap goods and easy credit, means Italy’s economy stabilizes a decade early, and even the ballooning debt is shrugged off as the Prime Minister merely takes more loans to pay all the old ones. Rome becomes a financial capital of much of the European Continent, with sleek new highways carving their way through the mountains and quiet villages alike. The few who complain are shut up by the new ,,Anti Extremism Laws”, originally set up alongside the CIA and China’s Investigation Department to hunt down the far right and far left. The symbolic end for the years of Lead comes in 1981, when Augusto Fernando César, alongside several CIA and Italian Police officers, manages to hunt down the leaders of the seven largest terrorist groups in a month (between mid-February and Mid-March, to be exact).While Governments remain rather unstable (with the post of Prime Minister changing hands 6 times between 1972 and 1987, five of those between members of different parties) they got a lot of leeway thanks to the newly stable streets and restored economy, ensuring the ,,Establishment” is not threatened by radicals on either side. That said, even in 1988 signs of trouble could be seen - since Q4 1987, the economic growth had slowed down to a crawl, much of the South’s wealth has been stolen by corrupt officials, and the Prime Minister had died of a stroke, with the ruling Christian Democrats seriously threatened by the Unity Coalition (consisting of moderate Socialists and the Republican Party) for the first time since the Republic’s birth over 40 years prior. A snap election was planned to be held on June 10th, 1988.
Liechtenstein (The Economy still booms, and in the 70s the country transforms into a Tax Heaven thanks to low taxes and a thriving financial sector. Women were denied the vote in 1984 by a narrow margin. The population keeps rising, and the Government even dips its toes into Tourism with the opening of a major museum in 1987, spending a good chunk of their budget for that year on the various works of art. This is one of the reasons they’re already drowning in debt come 1989, with horrific unemployment reaching over 70% of the populace and a flood of petty crime as people struggle to make ends meet. In exchange for abandoning their debt, the Swiss annex the country (although the last Government tries to frame it as a fully willing reunification) and subsequently do some investing in it. Either way, by 2000 most locals leave for greener pastures, but the abandoned infrastructure is repurposed in 2003-2004 as Secret Bunkers for the Swiss Political and Economic Elite. )
Luxembourg (the ,,30 glorious years” extend into the future, as even though the steel industry begins to decline, foreign loans mean the country seamlessly transitions into an economy based purely on finance and beer, with Luxemburger Beer eventually becoming a staple of many European Households - in the East, the symbol of newly reachable prosperity and a slice of the Western world, much like Coca Cola before it - and later, in the Red Decade, a most missed sign of what was lost. Abortion is not legalized, but Divorce is, and while in 1981 the Right won the Election they’re defeated in 1984, bringing the Democrats back to power. Pretty prosperous.)
Malta (Becomes independent in 1974, as in OTL, and drifts pretty close to North Africa. They don’t openly proclaim themselves a Zakat state, due to being, ya know, Christian, but they’re pretty much the closest thing to one outside Africa proper. The Labour Party dominates politics, winning every election in a landslide as living standards soar to new heights. Gaddafi and the Prime Minister meet several times a year. After the 1988 Sinai War, the country briefly considered asking Libya to annex itself, but Europe convinced” them to not do that and instead de facto occupied the Island, instituting a minority government for “safety purposes” in 1989. In 1991, the Island voted to join Italy (with 51% in favor and about 40% turnout, and several violations reported) and later became part of the Federation. By 2000, mostly a Military Base with some civilian institutions attached.)
Monaco (Other than a tiny sector specifying in supplying the locals with food and electronics, most of Monaco remains what it’d been for decades at that point - a Half Bank, Half Tax Heaven, 100% Tourist Trap. The Climate still attracts thousands, and the local Government even makes the higher temperatures a point in their tourism campaigns, trying to spin it as beneficial for your skin thanks to Vitamin A and other buzzwords they hope will attract more visitors. It works, but is relentlessly mocked on French and Italian Late Night Shows. In 1989, though, due to their reliance on rich idiots leaving their life savings in the country, the Economy completely crashes, with the final nail being a horrible 1990 Summer Season (Only about 25% of 1989’s visitors returned, which itself was a 60% decrease from 1988, which also was a drop of 15% from 1987’s peak. You do the math.) and a subsequent crash of the local banks. Since very few foreign companies needed a tax haven anymore, Monaco soon became an impoverished shithole incapable of keeping the lights on, with essential services stretched to the breaking point. After a Casino Fire escalates and threatens to spill across the border to minimum resistance, the French decide they’d had enough and annex the microstate in 1991. They subsequently take everything not nailed to the floor, and leave it mostly a deserted wasteland, with the exception of the still piss poor locals. Most of them leave by 2000 too, and those who don’t are chased out by the constant fires and storms caused by climate change - about half of former Monaco is actually flooded all year round by 2010. Obviously not shown on maps. 
Netherlands (as expected, Welfare is gutted in the 70s and 80s, and while the country is the most socially liberal nation in Europe, it still experiences a rather sharp turn toward Conservatism as a result of the Screaming Sixties. The Anti Revolutionary Party rebounds and, contrary to what some expected, cannibalizes its Christian Democratic coalition allies instead of the other way around. While it’s still nowhere near a plurality, let alone a majority, it becomes the largest party on the country’s right and stonewalls any sort of Liberal reforms (aside from economic ones). Part of this is thanks to them completely shedding their own “moderate " wing and going full Free Market Conservatism. The squatting movement is stunted when the Government throws a bunch of taxpayer dollars at Private Companies to fix homelessness (and skim much of that cash off the top) - these new homes are as opulent as they are inefficient, but who cares for a little pollution and such waste of space if it’s as good as free? Population growth stagnates but doesn't quite fall, remaining very low for Fabulous Decades standards. Crime falls, while cultural shifts are still reasonably genuine as opposed to just screams of anguish from the youth or a money laundering scheme (as is so often the case in other FabDec era nations). The last election, in 1986, gave the Anti-Revolutionaries a very wide mandate, even if a coalition of disgruntled Christian Socialists, Labourites and Anti-Western Conservatives did mount a somewhat effective resistance to them in some northeastern constituencies. In 1988 the Economy was doing quite well, even if there had been a slight dip compared to the last financial quarter.)
Norway (Exploits the living shit out of North Sea Oil and Gas, invests a bunch of it into better excavation tech, further depleting those sources but also finding new ones ahead of schedule. The Norwegian Government uses this revenue for large-scale rural renewal with entire towns renovated and having brand new town squares - ones that would later become symbols of a bygone age. Statoil was privatized in 1979 (but later re-nationalized in the early 1990s). That said, community decay does hit quite hard - communal spaces and mess halls decline, even those that were renovated becoming strange, osymandian - well kept but rarely attended by anyone. As the natural environment is already hit hard, traditional camping trips nosedive in popularity in favor of watching color TVs (even that is no longer a family activity - while not as rich as Americans, Norwegians have 3 Colour TVs per house, dividing everyone between their own rooms). The country has one of the highest rates of drug abuse in the world, with a tragically high amount of youth overdoses - not to the point where it could actively hurt the country’s demography, but enough to be noticeable even to laymen observers. In spite of a few operations by the famous Special Agent Augusto Fernando César in 1982 and 1983 (ones the Government paid a ton for), the underlying issues are not solved, and the country remains in a sort of spiritual void until the Sinai Shock. Labour remains the largest party, often ruling with an outright majority, even if they have adopted many economically liberal policies to keep the petrodollars flowing. Fares the best in the early Red Decade - see Part 2-3 Section II for more info)
Portugal (Pressured by the USA, the Portuguese let Angola and Mozambique go in name so they can still exploit the living shit out of them in practice. Fully knowing the Military is expecting further reforms, the President authorized ,,limited” Democratization measures, with more power given to parliament and less crackdowns on the opposition (aside from the Far Left, but it’s not like China - once their main sponsor - gave much of a shit anymore) alongside economic liberalization. He gets a shitton of money from the European Economic Community. Portugal also pours millions into creating a proper vacation industry, with cases of cancer swept under the rug and brand new complexes, like big waterparks and massive 20 story hotels. After a West German Tourist is arrested for accidentally “engaging with anti-national elements” (he flirted with a girl he wasn’t aware was a part of the Opposition) the President speeds up the reforms, and after his death in 1984 proper elections for the legislature are held.  The Centre-right “Opposition” wins and subsequently pressures the new guy to resign, replacing him with a freely elected (the new constitution states it’s the parliament that elects the President) dude. They joined the EEC in 1985, alongside Spain. The next Elections are slated for September 1988.)
San Marino (Remains stable, with a flourishing tourist industry. The Communist Party, much to Moscow’s chagrin, fully adopts Chenism and wins the 1983 Elections, forming a Majority Government. They continue large scale development, with mass agriculture (to fuel Europe’s thirst for luxury goods like wine and olive oil) and a flourishing banking sector (although one under somewhat strict Government supervision) established. The Communists grew their majority in 1988, and after the Sinai War tried to dissolve the Grand and General Council while also adopting totalitarian policies. This leads to a series of riots and a coup in 1989, after which a ,,Popular Front” headed by the Christian Democrats and a newly reformed Socialist Party (having split into the Democratic Socialist Party and the Socialist Agreement in the early 1970s, partially paving the way for Communist Governance in the first place). The economy still goes to shit and the microstate is overwhelmed by Italian refugees from neighboring areas. Requests to be annexed in 1992, accepted by the Italian Government. Afterward it is mostly used by Europe as a nation-sized labor camp, still up and going (even if as polluted as the rest of the continent) in 2027.
Spain (Also pressured by the USA, Franco lets the Free Market be liberalized more, stabbing his old buds - the National Syndicalists, Falangists and Conservative Labor Unions - in the back, with those who resist often dying of suicide after shooting themselves seven times. The new Prime Minister (Franco having been transferred to the post of ,,Chairman of the Legislative Assembly”, which is de jure powerless but he still holds some influence de facto)) mostly apes what Portugal is doing but goes significantly further with social liberalism. Franco is absolutely disgusted but can’t do shit without risking a CIA backed coup, dying and later being commercialized (there’s Franco Balloons, Franco Paintings, Franco Chairs, Franco Bobbleheads and more sold on street fairs by people who probably couldn’t tell him apart from Salazar). In the early 1980s the EEC began to pressure them big time, with proper elections held in 1985. The PM and his ,,People’s Freedom Party” easily secure a majority and continue to turn the country into a Free Market, “Libertarian” (in big quotation marks - they still hold the Security Apparatus but use it to hunt down remaining terrorists in a sort of Rent-a-Augusto / ,,I can’t believe it’s not real Fernando” kind of way, to get extra money) paradise with a bunch of tourist spots. They quickly adopt socially liberal laws (the Prime Minister himself being rather liberal), with Women’s rights expanded and even some token gestures toward the LGB Community. Minorities are granted autonomy and ETA Dissolves after negotiations (with the USA and China as intermediaries) that create a very favorable Basque Parliament. They joined the EEC alongside Portugal in 1985 (sometimes called the ,,Summer Entrance" or ,,Sandy Marriage” although both terms are manufactured by the media and rarely used by the majority of the public). Monarchy abolished via referendum in January 1988, Prince Felipe became a famous sportsman, participating in local tournaments, becoming Spain’s top Footballers and preparing for the 1988 Olympics. The palace planned to become the heart of a massive tourist trap, slated for opening in mid 1989. Tourism heavily promoted throughout all of this time - Barcelona became “ the Affair capital of Europe”, sometimes denounced by televangelists across the globe, especially after Nudist beaches were zoned in late 1987. The “Sea of Plastic” is made early, initially in the mid 80s to harvest luxury fruit and make it even cheaper (idea of some entrepreneurial businessman, sick of having to split his import profits with local corrupt bureaucrats or authoritarian tinpot dictators) and later repurposed for normal food in the Red Decade.
Sweden (Government attempts at increasing welfare are torpedoed by the Opposition, although the Social Democrats get around this by lowering taxes on the poor while keeping them on the rich (although sometimes foreign rich are exempt from this to not risk international isolation). Capital Flight still happens but many other businesses, mostly local ones, pop up to replace them. After the Social Democrats were kicked out in 1976 the privatization went all in, with the coalition government slashing many welfare programs (although keeping some) and giving money to everyone who wants it. They try to start-up a toy franchise meant to rival LEGO, but the rival’s monopoly on the market meant they flopped (although the short lived toys would become collectors items - both in the Red Decade, and for historians and nobles in future centuries). Corruption would begin to rise as a result of this prosperity and a near total lack of oversight, and even though, in 1986, César busts a corruption ring (he got leads on it following his Norwegian Drug Investigation) the Brazilian Government, and him as an extension, are convinced to merely give the Government the papers back as to not cause trouble in an election year. The corrupt officials were ,,purged” (mostly reassigned, or even merely scolded for getting caught) silently and things never went public. In exchange, a ton of Brazilian Officials got rich, and the Ericsson Hospital was founded in Rio as payment. Another site, apparently an airport of some kind (historians aren’t sure) was planned to be constructed in 1989-1990 somewhere in the South, but that was cancelled after the Crash. The Social Democrats roared back to power in 1989 (even if with a smaller majority than they had been used to) but their Prime Minister was assassinated in 1990 (some say by a Communist Spy, others suggest a Far Right fanatic, but evidence either way is sketchy). The usual moderate programs are created, and eventually the Nordic Federation is formed.
Turkey (The Economy was quickly liberalized in the early 70s due to international pressure, and after some very, very harsh growing pains - shortages of basic goods, hyperinflation and gas outages - it stabilized by the end of the decade. Democracy is not quite as lucky, but after some controversial actions by a Prime Minister - decried as Authoritarian by the opposition - the office gains extra powers at the cost of Parliament, increasing the length of the average Cabinet from 6 Months to 3 Years . In the 1980s Azerbaijan sold their oil to the country, sparking even more economic growth, and a series of swift NOT-WAR-CRIMES against the Kurds crushed the PKK in its cradle. All in all, everything is as good as it could be by 1988.Then it becomes a dictatorial shithole.)


